
[Illustration: Book Cover]




[Illustration: MAP OF CENTRAL AFRICA]




[Illustration]




THE BOY TRAVELLERS ON

THE CONGO

ADVENTURES OF TWO YOUTHS IN A JOURNEY WITH

HENRY M. STANLEY

"THROUGH THE DARK CONTINENT"

By THOMAS W. KNOX

AUTHOR OF

"THE BOY TRAVELLERS IN THE FAR EAST" "IN SOUTH AMERICA" AND "IN RUSSIA"

"THE YOUNG NIMRODS" "THE VOYAGE OF THE 'VIVIAN'" ETC.

Illustrated

NEW YORK

HARPER & BROTHERS, FRANKLIN SQUARE

1888




By THOMAS W. KNOX.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE BOY TRAVELLERS IN THE FAR EAST. Five Volumes. Copiously Illustrated.
8vo, Cloth, $3.00 each. The volumes sold separately. Each volume
complete in itself.

    I. ADVENTURES OF TWO YOUTHS IN A JOURNEY TO JAPAN AND CHINA.
   II. ADVENTURES OF TWO YOUTHS IN A JOURNEY TO SIAM AND JAVA. With
          Descriptions of Cochin China, Cambodia, Sumatra, and the Malay
          Archipelago.
  III. ADVENTURES OF TWO YOUTHS IN A JOURNEY TO CEYLON AND INDIA. With
          Descriptions of Borneo, the Philippine Islands, and Burmah.
   IV. ADVENTURES OF TWO YOUTHS IN A JOURNEY TO EGYPT AND PALESTINE.
    V. ADVENTURES OF TWO YOUTHS IN A JOURNEY THROUGH AFRICA.

THE BOY TRAVELLERS IN SOUTH AMERICA. Adventures of Two Youths in a
Journey through Ecuador, Peru, Bolivia, Brazil, Paraguay, Argentine
Republic, and Chili; with Descriptions of Patagonia and Tierra del
Fuego, and Voyages upon the Amazon and La Plata Rivers. Copiously
Illustrated. 8vo, Cloth, $3.00.

THE BOY TRAVELLERS IN THE RUSSIAN EMPIRE. Adventures of Two Youths in a
Journey in European and Asiatic Russia, with Accounts of a Tour across
Siberia, Voyages on the Amoor, Volga, and other Rivers, a Visit to
Central Asia, Travels Among the Exiles, and a Historical Sketch of the
Empire from its Foundation to the Present Time. Copiously Illustrated.
8vo, Cloth, $3.00.

THE BOY TRAVELLERS ON THE CONGO. Adventures of Two Youths in a Journey
with Henry M. Stanley "Through the Dark Continent." Copiously
Illustrated. 8vo, Cloth, $3.00.

THE VOYAGE OF THE "VIVIAN" TO THE NORTH POLE AND BEYOND. Adventures of
Two Youths in the Open Polar Sea. Copiously Illustrated. 8vo, Cloth,
$2.50.

HUNTING ADVENTURES ON LAND AND SEA. Two Volumes. Copiously Illustrated.
8vo, Cloth, $2.50 each. The volumes sold separately. Each volume
complete in itself.

   I. THE YOUNG NIMRODS IN NORTH AMERICA.
  II. THE YOUNG NIMRODS AROUND THE WORLD.

       *       *       *       *       *

PUBLISHED BY HARPER & BROTHERS, NEW YORK.

_Any of the above volumes sent by mail, postage prepaid, to any part of
the United States or Canada, on receipt of the price._

       *       *       *       *       *

Copyright, 1887, by HARPER & BROTHERS.--_All rights reserved._




PREFACE


As indicated on the title-page, "The Boy Travellers on the Congo" is
condensed from that remarkable narrative, "Through the Dark Continent,"
by one of the most famous explorers that the century has produced. The
origin of the present volume is sufficiently explained in the following
letter:

  "EVERETT HOUSE, NEW YORK, _December_ 1, 1886.

     "MY DEAR COLONEL KNOX,--It is a gift to be able to write to
     interest boys, and no one who has read your several volumes in the
     'Boy Traveller' series can doubt that you possess this gift to an
     eminent degree. While reading those interesting and valuable books
     of yours, I have regretted that they were not issued in the time of
     my own youth, so that I might have enjoyed as a boy the treat of
     their perusal. Now, the Harpers desire a condensation of my two
     volumes, 'Through the Dark Continent,' to be made for young folks,
     but I have neither the time, nor the experience in juvenile
     writing, for performing the work. I suggest that you shall produce
     a volume for your series of 'Boy Travellers,' and assure you that
     it would delight me greatly to have you take your boys, who have
     followed you through so many lands, on the journey that I made from
     Zanzibar to the mouth of the Congo.

     "There is too much in my work in its present form for their mental
     digestion; but, narrated in that chaste and forcible style which
     has proved so entertaining to them, they would certainly find the
     journey through Africa of exceeding interest when made in your
     company. By all means take Frank and Fred to the wilds of Africa;
     let them sail the equatorial lakes, travel through Uganda, Unyoro,
     and other countries ruled by dark-skinned monarchs, descend the
     magnificent and perilous Congo, see the strange tribes and people
     of that wonderful land, and repeat the adventures and discoveries
     that made my journey so eventful. You have my full permission, my
     dear friend, to use the material in any way you deem proper in
     adapting it to the requirements of the 'Boy Travellers.'

  "Sincerely yours, as always,
  HENRY M. STANLEY.
  "TO COLONEL THOS. W. KNOX."

The preparation of this book has been a double pleasure--first, to
comply with the wishes of an old friend, and secondly, to carry the boys
and girls of the present day to the wonderful region that, until very
recently, was practically unknown. I have the fullest confidence that
they will greatly enjoy the journey across equatorial Africa from the
eastern to the western sea, and eagerly peruse every line of Mr.
Stanley's narrative of discovery and adventure.

The portrait of Mr. Stanley is from a photograph taken early in 1886.
The maps on the inside of the covers were specially drawn for this work,
and the publishers, with their customary liberality, have allowed the
use of wood-cuts selected from several volumes of African travel and
exploration, in addition to those which originally appeared in "Through
the Dark Continent."

In the hope that "The Boy Travellers on the Congo" will be as cordially
received as were its predecessors in the series, the work is herewith
submitted to press and public for perusal and comment.

  T. W. K.
  NEW YORK, _May_, 1887.




CONTENTS


  CHAPTER I.

  CROSSING THE ATLANTIC OCEAN WITH STANLEY.--"THROUGH THE DARK
  CONTINENT."--AN IMPROMPTU GEOGRAPHICAL SOCIETY.--PERSONAL
  APPEARANCE OF STANLEY.--COMMENTS UPON HIM BY FRANK AND
  FRED.--HOW THE GEOGRAPHICAL SOCIETY WAS ORGANIZED.--READING
  STANLEY'S BOOK.--STANLEY'S DEPARTURE FROM ENGLAND FOR
  ZANZIBAR.--JOINT ENTERPRISE OF TWO NEWSPAPERS.--PREPARATIONS
  FOR THE EXPEDITION.--THE "LADY ALICE."--BARKER AND THE
  POCOCKS.--ZANZIBAR.--PRINCE BARGHASH.--INHABITANTS OF
  ZANZIBAR.--THE WANGWANA.                                       Page 13

  CHAPTER II.

  TRANSPORTATION IN AFRICA.--MEN AS BEASTS OF BURDEN.--PORTERS,
  AND THEIR PECULIARITIES.--ENGAGING MEN FOR THE EXPEDITION.--A
  "SHAURI."--TROUBLES WITH THE "LADY ALICE."--AGREEMENT BETWEEN
  STANLEY AND HIS MEN.--DEPARTURE FROM ZANZIBAR.--BAGAMOYO.--THE
  UNIVERSITIES MISSION.--DEPARTURE OF THE EXPEDITION.--DIFFICULTIES
  WITH THE PORTERS.--SUFFERINGS ON THE MARCH.--NATIVE SUSPENSION
  BRIDGES.--SHOOTING A ZEBRA.--LOSSES BY DESERTION.                   32

  CHAPTER III.

  RETARDED BY RAINS AND OTHER MISHAPS.--GENERAL DESPONDENCY.--DEATH
  OF EDWARD POCOCK.--A CHANGE FOR THE BETTER.--A LAND OF
  PLENTY.--ARRIVAL AT VICTORIA LAKE.--NATIVE SONG.--AFLOAT ON THE
  GREAT LAKE.--TERRIBLE TALES OF THE INHABITANTS.--ENCOUNTERS WITH
  THE NATIVES.--THE VICTORIA NILE.--RIPON FALLS.--SPEKE'S
  EXPLORATIONS.--THE ALEXANDRA NILE.--ARRIVAL AT KING MTESA'S
  COURT.--A MAGNIFICENT RECEPTION.--IN THE MONARCH'S
  PRESENCE.--STANLEY'S FIRST OPINIONS OF MTESA.                       53

  CHAPTER IV.

  PERSONAL APPEARANCE OF KING MTESA.--HIS RECEPTION OF MR.
  STANLEY.--A NAVAL REVIEW.--STANLEY'S MARKSMANSHIP.--THE KING'S
  PALACE.--RUBAGA, THE KING'S CAPITAL.--RECEPTION AT THE
  PALACE.--MEETING COLONEL LINANT DE BELLEFONDS.--CONVERTING MTESA
  TO CHRISTIANITY.--APPEAL FOR MISSIONARIES TO BE SENT TO
  MTESA.--DEPARTURE FOR USUKUMA.--FIGHT WITH THE NATIVES AT BUMBIREH
  ISLAND.--SUFFERINGS OF STANLEY AND HIS COMPANIONS ON LAKE
  VICTORIA.--A NARROW ESCAPE.--RETURN TO KAGEHYI.--DEATH OF FRED
  BARKER.--EMBARKING THE EXPEDITION.--KING LUKONGEH AND HIS PEOPLE.   76

  CHAPTER V.

  DEPARTURE FOR REFUGE ISLAND.--ARRIVAL IN UGANDA.--MTESA AT
  WAR.--STANLEY JOINS HIM AT RIPON FALLS.--A NAVAL BATTLE ON AN
  AFRICAN LAKE.--THE WAGANDA REPULSED.--CAPTURE OF A WAVUMA
  CHIEF.--STANLEY SAVES THE CHIEF'S LIFE.--HOW STANLEY BROUGHT THE
  WAR TO AN END.--HIS WONDERFUL MACHINE FOR DESTROYING THE
  WAVUMA.--RETIREMENT OF THE ARMY.--STANLEY'S RETURN TO HIS
  CAMP.--EXPEDITION TO MUTA NZEGE.--HOW IT FAILED.--THE EXPEDITION
  MARCHES SOUTHWARD.--IN KING RUMANIKA'S COUNTRY.--ARAB TRADERS IN
  AFRICA.--HAMED IBRAHIM.--KAFURRO AND LAKE WINDERMERE.--INTERVIEWS
  WITH KING RUMANIKA.--EXPLORING LAKE WINDERMERE.--AN UNHAPPY
  NIGHT.--IHEMA ISLAND.                                              102

  CHAPTER VI.

  STANLEY TELLS ABOUT KING RUMANIKA.--THE KARAGWÃ‰ GEOGRAPHICAL
  SOCIETY.--THE KING'S TREASURE-HOUSE.--GOOD-BYE TO HIS
  MAJESTY.--HOSTILITY BETWEEN ELEPHANT AND RHINOCEROS.--PLUNDERED
  IN USUI.--THE SOURCES OF THE ALEXANDRA NILE.--RETROSPECTION.--
  QUESTIONS OF TOPOGRAPHY.--INSOLENCE OF MANKORONGO.--DEATH OF
  "BULL."--TROUBLES WITH THE PETTY KINGS.--INTERVIEW WITH THE
  FAMOUS MIRAMBO.--GENERAL APPEARANCE OF THE RENOWNED
  AFRICAN.--AN IMPOSING CEREMONY.--BLOOD-BROTHERHOOD.--HOW
  GRANT'S CARAVAN WAS PLUNDERED.--MYONGA'S THREATS.--A
  COMPROMISE.--AMONG THE WATUTA.--IN SIGHT OF LAKE TANGANIKA.--
  ARRIVAL AT UJIJI.                                                  124

  CHAPTER VII.

  MR. STANLEY TAKES THE CHAIR.--DESCRIPTION OF UJIJI.--THE ARAB
  AND OTHER INHABITANTS.--MARKET SCENES.--LOCAL CURRENCY.--THE
  WAJIJI.--LAKE TANGANIKA.--STANLEY'S VOYAGE ON THE LAKE.--RISING
  OF THE WATERS.--THE LEGEND OF THE WELL.--HOW THE LAKE WAS
  FORMED.--DEPARTURE OF THE EXPEDITION.--SCENERY OF THE COAST.--
  MOUNTAINS WHERE THE SPIRITS DWELL.--SEEKING THE OUTLET OF THE
  LAKE.--THE LUKUGA RIVER.--EXPERIMENTS TO FIND A CURRENT.--CURIOUS
  HEAD-DRESSES.--RETURN TO UJIJI.--LENGTH AND EXTENT OF LAKE
  TANGANIKA.                                                         152

  CHAPTER VIII.

  STANLEY CONTINUES THE READING.--BAD NEWS AT UJIJI.--SMALL-POX
  AND ITS RAVAGES.--DESERTIONS BY WHOLESALE.--DEPARTURE OF THE
  EXPEDITION.--CROSSING LAKE TANGANIKA.--TRAVELLERS' TROUBLES.--
  TERRIFYING RUMORS.--PEOPLE WEST OF THE LAKE.--SINGULAR
  HEAD-DRESSES--CANNIBALISM.--DESCRIPTION OF AN AFRICAN
  VILLAGE.--APPEARANCE OF THE INHABITANTS.--IN MANYEMA.--STORY
  ABOUT LIVINGSTONE.--MANYEMA HOUSES.--DONKEYS AS CURIOSITIES.--
  KITETÃ‰ AND HIS BEARD.--THE LUAMA AND THE LUALABA.--ON THE BANKS
  OF THE LIVINGSTONE.                                                174

  CHAPTER IX.

  DIFFICULTIES OF LIVINGSTONE AND CAMERON WITH THEIR
  FOLLOWERS.--PERSONAL APPEARANCE OF TIPPU-TIB.--NEGOTIATIONS
  FOR AN ESCORT.--TIPPU-TIB ARRANGES TO GO WITH STANLEY.--THE
  WONDERS OF UREGGA.--GORILLAS AND BOA-CONSTRICTORS.--THEIR
  REMARKABLE PERFORMANCES.--A NATION OF DWARFS.--HOW STANLEY
  DECIDED WHAT ROUTE TO FOLLOW.--HEADS OR TAILS?--"SHALL IT BE
  SOUTH OR NORTH?"--SIGNING THE CONTRACT WITH TIPPU-TIB.--A
  REMARKABLE ACCIDENT.--ENTERING NYANGWÃ‰.--LOCATION AND
  IMPORTANCE OF THE PLACE.--ITS ARAB RESIDENTS.--MARKET SCENES
  AT NYANGWÃ‰.--READY FOR THE START.                                  201

  CHAPTER X.

  DEPARTURE FROM NYANGWÃ‰.--THE DARK UNKNOWN.--IN THE PRIMEVAL
  FOREST.--AN AFRICAN WILDERNESS.--SAVAGE FURNITURE.--TIPPU-TIB'S
  DEPENDANTS.--A TOILSOME MARCH.--THE DENSE JUNGLE.--A DEMORALIZED
  COLUMN.--AFRICAN WEAPONS.--A VILLAGE BLACKSMITH.--SKULLS OF
  SOKOS.--STANLEY'S LAST PAIR OF SHOES.--SNAKES IN THE WAY.--THE
  TERRIBLE UNDERGROWTH.--NATIVES OF UREGGA AND THEIR
  CHARACTERISTICS.--SKULLS AS STREET ORNAMENTS.--AMONG THE
  CANNIBALS.--ON THE RIVER'S BANK.--A SUDDEN INSPIRATION.--THE
  TRUE ROAD TO THE SEA.--TIPPU-TIB'S DISCOURAGEMENTS.--ENCOUNTERING
  THE NATIVES.--SUCCESSFUL NEGOTIATIONS.--THE EXPEDITION FERRIED
  OVER THE RIVER.--CAMPING IN THE WENYA.                             221

  CHAPTER XI.

  HOW STANLEY OBTAINED CANOES.--THE PEOPLE OF UKUSU.--THEIR
  HOSTILITY.--A FIGHT AND TERMS OF PEACE.--SEPARATION FROM
  TIPPU-TIB.--DEPARTURE "TOWARDS THE UNKNOWN."--A SAD FAREWELL.--
  AMONG THE VINYA-NARA.--THE NATIVES AT STANLEY FALLS.--A FIERCE
  BATTLE.--DEFENDING A STOCKADE.--BOATS CAPSIZED IN A TEMPEST AND
  MEN DROWNED.--BEGINNING OF THE NEW YEAR.--A BATTLE ON THE
  WATER.--MONSTER CANOES.--AMONG THE MWANA NTABA.--THE NATIVES ARE
  DEFEATED.--FIRST CATARACT OF STANLEY FALLS.--CAMPED IN A
  FORTIFICATION.                                                     243

  CHAPTER XII.

  ATTACKED BY THE COMBINED FORCES OF THE MWANA NTABA AND BASWA
  TRIBES.--THEY ARE REPULSED.--EXPLORING THE FIRST CATARACT.--
  CARRYING AND DRAGGING THE BOATS THROUGH THE FOREST AND AROUND
  THE FALLS.--AN ISLAND CAMP.--NATIVE WEAPONS AND UTENSILS.--
  ANOTHER BATTLE.--HOW ZAIDI WAS SAVED FROM A PERILOUS POSITION.--
  CAUGHT IN A NET.--HOW THE NET WAS BROKEN.--FISHES IN THE GREAT
  RIVER.--HOW THE OTHER CATARACTS WERE PASSED.--AFLOAT ON SMOOTH
  WATER.--A HOSTILE VILLAGE.--ANOTHER BATTLE.--ATTACKED BY A LARGE
  FLOTILLA.--A MONSTER BOAT.--A TEMPLE OF IVORY.--NO MARKET FOR
  ELEPHANTS' TUSKS.--EVIDENCES OF CANNIBALISM.--FRIENDLY NATIVES
  OF RUBUNGA.--PORTUGUESE MUSKETS IN THE HANDS OF THE NATIVES.       259

  CHAPTER XIII.

  IN URANGI.--A NOISY RECEPTION.--WONDERFUL HEAD-DRESSES.--A
  TREACHEROUS ATTACK.--ANIMAL LIFE ALONG THE RIVER.--BIRDS AND
  BEASTS OF THE GREAT STREAM.--A BATTLE WITH THE BANGALA.--
  FIRE-ARMS IN THE HANDS OF THE NATIVES.--THE SAVAGES, ALTHOUGH IN
  SUPERIOR NUMBERS, ARE REPULSED.--HIGH WINDS AND STORMS.--EFFECT
  OF THE CLIMATE ON MR. STANLEY'S HEALTH.--A GREAT TRIBUTARY
  RIVER.--FRIENDLY PEOPLE OF IKENGO.--PROVISIONS IN ABUNDANCE.--
  ISLANDS IN THE RIVER.--DEATH OF AMINA.--A MOURNFUL SCENE.--THE
  LEVY HILLS.--HIPPOPOTAMUS CREEK.--BOLOBO.--THE KING OF
  CHUMBIRI.--A CRAFTY POTENTATE.--HIS DRESS, PIPE, WIVES, AND
  SONS.--INCONVENIENT COLLARS.--CURIOUS CUSTOMS.                     277

  CHAPTER XIV.

  TREACHERY OF THE KING'S SONS.--THE GREATEST RASCAL OF AFRICA.--A
  PYTHON IN CAMP.--STANLEY POOL.--DOVER CLIFFS.--MANKONEH.--FIRST
  SOUND OF THE FALLS.--BARGAINING FOR FOOD.--LOSS OF THE BIG
  GOAT.--EXCHANGING CHARMS.--FALL OF THE CONGO FROM NYANGWÃ‰ TO
  STANLEY POOL.--GOING AROUND THE GREAT FALL.--DRAGGING THE BOATS
  OVERLAND.--GORDON-BENNET RIVER.--"THE CALDRON."--LOSS OF THE
  "LONDON TOWN."--POOR KALULU.--HIS DEATH IN THE RIVER.--LOSS OF
  MEN BY DROWNING.--SAD SCENES IN CAMP.                              300

  CHAPTER XV.

  THE FRIENDLY BATEKÃ‰.--GREAT SNAKES.--SOUDI'S STRANGE ADVENTURES.--
  CAPTURED BY HOSTILE NATIVES.--DESCENDING RAPIDS AND FALLS.--LOSS
  OF A CANOE.--"WHIRLPOOL RAPIDS."--THE "LADY ALICE" IN PERIL.--
  GAVUBU'S COVE.--"LADY ALICE" RAPIDS.--A PERILOUS DESCENT.--ALARM
  OF STANLEY'S PEOPLE.--TRIBUTARY STREAMS.--PANIC AMONG THE
  CANOE-MEN.--NATIVE VILLAGES.--INKISI FALLS.--TUCKEY'S CATARACT.--
  A ROAD OVER A MOUNTAIN.--AMONG THE BABWENDÃ‰.--AFRICAN MARKETS.--
  TRADING AMONG THE TRIBES.--SHOELESS TRAVELLERS.--EXPERIMENTS IN
  COOKING.--LIMITED STOCK OF PROVISIONS.--CENTRAL AFRICAN ANTS.--
  "JIGGAS."--DANGERS OF UNPROTECTED FEET.                            317

  CHAPTER XVI.

  A DISAPPOINTMENT.--NOT TUCKEY'S FURTHEST.--BUILDING NEW CANOES.--
  THE "LIVINGSTONE," "STANLEY," AND "JASON."--FALLS BELOW INKISI.--
  FRANK POCOCK DROWNED.--STANLEY'S GRIEF.--"IN MEMORIAM."--MUTINY
  IN CAMP.--HOW IT WAS QUELLED.--LOSS OF THE "LIVINGSTONE."--THE
  CHIEF CARPENTER DROWNED.--ISANGILA CATARACT.--TUCKEY'S SECOND
  SANGALLA.--ABANDONING THE BOATS.--OVERLAND TO BOMA.--THE
  EXPEDITION STARVING.--A LETTER ASKING HELP.--VOLUNTEER COURIERS.--
  DELAYS AT STARTING.--VAIN EFFORTS TO BUY FOOD.--A DREARY MARCH.--
  SUFFERINGS OF STANLEY'S PEOPLE.--THE LEADER'S ANXIETY.             335

  CHAPTER XVII.

  THE WEARY MARCH RESUMED.--RETURN OF THE MESSENGERS.--ARRIVAL OF
  RELIEF.--SCENE IN CAMP.--DISTRIBUTION OF PROVISIONS.--THE SONG OF
  JOY.--A WELCOME LETTER.--"ENOUGH NOW: FALL TO."--PERSONAL
  LUXURIES FOR THE LEADER.--"PALE ALE! SHERRY! PORT WINE! CHAMPAGNE!
  TEA! COFFEE! WHITE SUGAR! WHEATEN BREAD!"--STANLEY'S REPLY TO THE
  GENEROUS STRANGERS.--SUMMARY PUNISHMENT FOR THEFT.--GREETING
  CIVILIZATION.--RECEPTION BY WHITE MEN.--THE FREEDOM OF BOMA.--
  LIFTED INTO THE HAMMOCK.--CHARACTERISTICS OF BOMA.--A BANQUET AND
  FAREWELL.--PONTA DA LENHA.--OUT ON THE OCEAN.--ADIEU TO THE CONGO.  351

  CHAPTER XVIII.

  ARRIVAL AT KABINDA.--WEST AFRICAN MERCHANTS.--DEATH AMONG THE
  WANGWANA.--ILLNESS AMONG THE PEOPLE OF THE EXPEDITION.--STANLEY'S
  ANXIETY FOR HIS FOLLOWERS.--THEIR FAILING HEALTH.--ENCOURAGING
  THEM WITH WORDS AND KIND TREATMENT.--THE BANE OF IDLENESS.--
  LEAVING KABINDA.--SAN PAULO DE LOANDA.--KINDNESS OF THE PORTUGUESE
  OFFICIALS.--H. B. MAJESTY'S SHIP "INDUSTRY."--CARRIED TO THE CAPE
  OF GOOD HOPE.--THE WANGWANA SEE A "FIRE-CARRIAGE."--TO NATAL AND
  ZANZIBAR.--RECEPTION.--DISBANDING THE EXPEDITION.--AFFECTING
  SCENES.--STANLEY'S TRIBUTE TO HIS FOLLOWERS.                       365

  CHAPTER XIX.

  THE LAST MEETING ON BOARD THE "EIDER."--FOUNDING THE FREE STATE OF
  CONGO.--MR. STANLEY'S LATER WORK ON THE GREAT RIVER.--BUILDING
  ROADS AND ESTABLISHING STATIONS.--MAKING PEACE WITH THE NATIVES.--
  BULA MATARI.--RESOURCES OF THE CONGO VALLEY.--STANLEY'S LATEST
  BOOK.--STEAMERS ON THE RIVER.--THE CONGO RAILWAY.--STANLEY'S
  PRESENT MISSION IN AFRICA.--EMIN PASHA AND HIS WORK.--HOW STANLEY
  PROPOSES TO RELIEVE HIM.--DR. SCHNITZLER.--BEY OR PASHA?--MWANGA,
  KING OF UGANDA.--HIS HOSTILITY TO WHITE MEN.--KILLING BISHOP
  HANNINGTON.--THE EGYPTIAN EQUATORIAL PROVINCE.--LETTER FROM
  STANLEY.--HIS PLANS FOR THE RELIEF EXPEDITION.--TIPPU-TIB AND HIS
  MEN.--FROM ZANZIBAR TO THE CONGO.                                  381

  CHAPTER XX.

  MORE AFRICAN STUDIES.--MASAI LAND.--EARLY HISTORY OF THE MOMBASA
  COAST.--MOUNT KILIMANJARO.--ITS DISCOVERERS AND EXPLORERS.--
  REBMANN'S UMBRELLA.--THOMSON'S EXPEDITION AND ITS OBJECT.--FRERE
  TOWN AND MOMBASA.--JOURNEY TO MASAI LAND.--HOSTILITY OF THE
  NATIVES.--NARROW ESCAPES.--MASAI WARRIORS AND THEIR OCCUPATIONS.--
  MANNERS AND CUSTOMS OF THE PEOPLE.--THOMSON AS A MAGICIAN.--
  JOHNSTON'S KILIMANJARO EXPEDITION.--HEIGHT AND PECULIARITIES OF
  THE GREAT MOUNTAIN.--MANDARA AND HIS COURT.--SLAVE-TRADING.--MASAI
  WOMEN.--SURROUNDED BY LIONS.--BISHOP HANNINGTON.--STORY OF HIS
  DEATH IN UGANDA.                                                   410

  CHAPTER XXI.

  STANLEY'S HUNTING ADVENTURES.--AFRICA THE FIELD FOR THE
  SPORTSMAN.--HUNTING IN SOUTH AFRICA.--NIGHT-SHOOTING AT
  WATER-HOLES AND SPRINGS.--ABUNDANCE OF GAME.--DANGER OF THIS KIND
  OF SPORT.--LIONS AND ELEPHANTS.--MAN-EATING LIONS.--IN THE JAWS
  OF A LION.--DR. LIVINGSTONE'S NARROW ESCAPE.--THE HOPO, OR
  GAME-TRAP ON A LARGE SCALE.--DU CHAILLU AND HIS ADVENTURES.--
  SHOOTING THE GORILLA.--RESEMBLANCE OF THE GORILLA TO MAN.--
  PRODIGIOUS STRENGTH OF THE GORILLA.--HOW HE IS HUNTED.--THE END.   442




ILLUSTRATIONS.


  A Scene on the Congo                                   _Frontispiece._
  Map of Africa showing Route from Zanzibar to Boma       _Front Cover._
  Map of Emin Pasha's Province and the Congo Routes        _Back Cover._
  Portrait of Henry M. Stanley                                        12
  Sandy Hook from Navesink Light-house                                13
  Stanley in Abyssinia                                                15
  Musicians of the Dark Continent                                     16
  Village where Dr. Livingstone Died                                  18
  James Gordon Bennett                                                19
  The _Lady Alice_, in Sections                                       20
  Candidates for Service with Stanley                                 21
  View of a Portion of the Sea-front of Zanzibar, from the Water
      Battery to Shangani Point                                       23
  Zanzibar, from the Sea                                              23
  Red Cliffs behind Universities Mission, Zanzibar                    24
  View from the Roof of Mr. Augustus Sparhawk's House                 25
  The British Consulate at Zanzibar                                   26
  Seyyid Barghash                                                     27
  A Zanzibar Nurse-maid                                               28
  Lady of Zanzibar Reading an Arabic Manuscript                       29
  Native Water-carrier, Zanzibar                                      30
  Hindoo Merchant of Zanzibar                                         31
  Negro Nurse-maid, Zanzibar                                          33
  A Zanzibar Bride                                                    34
  Window of an Arab House, Zanzibar                                   35
  Coxswain Uledi, and Manwa Sera, Chief Captain                       36
  A Merchant of Zanzibar                                              37
  Tarya Topan                                                         39
  Universities Mission at Mbwenni, Zanzibar                           40
  Harem in the House of the Secretary of the Sultan of Zanzibar       41
  "Towards the Dark Continent."                                       42
  Scene in Bagamoyo                                                   43
  Wife of Manwa Sera                                                  45
  A Leading Citizen of Bagamoyo                                       46
  The Expedition at Rosako                                            47
  View from the Village of Mamboya                                    49
  Our Camp at Mpwapwa                                                 50
  Detective and Assistants                                            51
  An African Belle                                                    52
  An African Blacksmith's-shop                                        53
  Funeral of Edward Pocock: View of Our Camp                          55
  In Memoriam of Edward Pocock                                        56
  An African Lamb                                                     56
  Unyamwezi Porter                                                    57
  View of Kagehyi from the Edge of the Lake                           59
  Frank Pocock                                                        60
  African Arms and Ornaments                                          61
  View near Victoria Lake                                             62
  Dwellers on the Shore of the Lake                                   63
  The _Lady Alice_ at Bridge Island, Victoria Nyanza                  64
  View of the Bay leading to Rugedzi Channel from Kigoma, near
      Kisorya, South Side of UkerewÃ©, Coast of Speke Gulf             65
  View of Ripon Falls from the Uganda Side                            67
  Dressed for Cold Weather                                            68
  The Victoria Nile, North of Ripon Falls, Rushing towards Unyoro,
      from the Usoga Side of the Falls                                69
  Reception by King Mtesa's Body-guard at Usavara                     71
  Waiting Orders                                                      72
  Sekebobo, Chief of ChagwÃ©. Mtesa, the Emperor of Uganda.
      Chambarango, the Chief. Pokino, the Prime-minister. Other
      Chiefs.                                                         73
  Dwarf at the King's Court                                           74
  The King's Dinner-dish                                              76
  Fish found in Lake Victoria                                         78
  Rubaga, the Capital of the King of Uganda                           79
  Fleet of the King of Uganda, Ready for War                          81
  Audience-hall of the Palace at Rubaga                               82
  Wooden Kettle-drum                                                  83
  African Hatchet, Spade, and Adze                                    83
  Head of a "Madoqua"--Species of Antelope                            85
  Shugrangu House, an African Mission Station, with Grave of Mrs.
      Livingstone                                                     87
  Warriors of the Upper Nile Region                                   89
  Reception at Bumbireh Island, Victoria Nyanza                       91
  Hut and Granary on the Island                                       93
  A Woman of the Island                                               94
  Village Enclosing Cattle                                            95
  Heads of Spears                                                     96
  Central African Goat                                                97
  Cairn Erected to the Memory of Frederick Barker: Majita and Ururi
      Mountains in the Distance, across Speke Gulf                    98
  At the Landing-place of Msossi, King Lukongeh's Capital             99
  Store-house for Grain                                               99
  WakerewÃ© Stool                                                     100
  WakerewÃ© Dwelling-house                                            100
  Fish-nets                                                          100
  WakerewÃ© Canoes                                                    100
  WakerewÃ© Warrior                                                   100
  Strange Granite Rocks of Wezi Island, Midway between Usukuma and
      UkerewÃ©                                                        101
  Usukuma Canoe                                                      102
  Island called Elephant Rock                                        103
  Mtesa's Camp, Ingira                                               104
  One of the Great Naval Battles between the Waganda and the Wavuma,
      in the Channel between Ingira Island and Cape Nakaranga        105
  Small Canoe                                                        106
  View of Country near Mtesa's Camp                                  106
  The Floating Fortlet Moving towards Ingira                         107
  Uganda War Canoe                                                   109
  Wangwana Hut in Camp. Hut at Jinja                                 110
  Head of Central African Hartebeest                                 110
  The Camp of the Expedition                                         111
  Mount Edwin Arnold                                                 112
  Marching towards Muta Nzege: Mount Gordon-Bennett in the Distance  113
  Grass-roofed Hut, Unyoro                                           114
  Native Hut, KaragwÃ©                                                114
  View near Kafurro                                                  115
  Central African Antelope, KaragwÃ©                                  116
  View of Ufumbiro Mountains from Mount near Mtagata Hot Springs     117
  Rumanika's Treasure-house                                          118
  A Spearman of KaragwÃ©                                              119
  Mountain Scene in KaragwÃ©                                          119
  Boat on Lake Windermere                                            120
  Kagera Skiff                                                       121
  Native Woman of Fashion                                            121
  Ihema Hut                                                          122
  A Native of Uhha                                                   122
  Boat of Lake Ihema                                                 122
  Hut of Uganda                                                      123
  Small TembÃ© of Ugogo                                               123
  House of an Arab Merchant near Rumanika's Village                  124
  On the Way to the Meeting                                          125
  Ground-plan of King's House                                        126
  Treasure-house, Arms, and Treasures of Rumanika                    127
  The Expedition Traversing the Valley                               129
  Pottery in Usui                                                    130
  A Village in Western Usui                                          132
  Camp of an Arab Merchant                                           133
  "Bull."                                                            135
  A Hut and its Frame                                                136
  View in the Interior of an African Village                         137
  Serombo Huts                                                       138
  War-Drum and Idol                                                  139
  A "Ruga-Ruga," one of Mirambo's Patriots                           139
  Hillside House in Mirambo's Country                                140
  Unyamwezi Chief and his Wife                                       141
  Shield and Drum                                                    142
  Color-party of an English Expedition in Africa                     143
  Mountains along the Route of the Expedition                        145
  Fashionable Hair-dressing                                          147
  One of the Watuta                                                  148
  Bow, Spears, Hatchets, and Arrow-Heads                             149
  Idols Sheltered from the Rain                                      150
  Arab House near Ujiji                                              150
  Whistle, Pillow, and Hatchet                                       151
  Head of Uguhha Woman                                               152
  Ujiji, looking North from the Market-place, Viewed from the Roof
      of our TembÃ© at Ujiji                                          153
  Arab Dhow at Ujiji                                                 154
  A Native of Rua, who was a Visitor at Ujiji                        155
  Dress and Tattooing of a Native of Uguhha                          156
  Charms Worn by the Wajiji                                          157
  A River Ferry-boat                                                 158
  Heads of Natives                                                   158
  The Wazaramo Tribe                                                 159
  Rawlinson Mountains                                                161
  Head-dress and Hatchet                                             162
  Brother Rocks                                                      163
  The Extreme Southern Reach of Lake Tanganika                       164
  Mtombwa                                                            165
  KungwÃ© Peaks                                                       166
  The "High Places" of the Spirit Mtombwa: View of Mtombwa Urungu    167
  Mount Murumbi, near Lukuga Creek                                   168
  UbujwÃ© Head-dress                                                  170
  Uguha Head-dress                                                   170
  Village Scene.--Dwellings and Grain-houses                         171
  A Woman of Uguha                                                   172
  Uhyeya Head-dress                                                  172
  Spirit Island, Lake Tanganika                                      172
  Sketch Near Ujiji                                                  173
  In Council: The Courtyard of Our TembÃ© at Ujiji                    175
  Central African Goat                                               176
  M'Sehazy Haven and Camp, at the Mouth of M'Sehazy River            177
  Huts and Store-house                                               179
  Sub-Chief, West of Lake Tanganika                                  180
  Heads of Men of Manyema                                            181
  Natives of UbujwÃ©                                                  181
  A Native of Uhyeya                                                 182
  One of the Wahyeya of Uhombo. (Back View)                          182
  A Valley among the Hills                                           183
  Going a-fishing                                                    184
  Village Forge and Idol                                             185
  Ready for Fighting                                                 186
  African Owls                                                       188
  A Village in Manyema                                               189
  A Youth of East Manyema                                            190
  A Manyema Adult                                                    190
  The Valley of Mabaro                                               191
  A Young Woman of East Manyema                                      192
  Village Scene in Southeast Manyema                                 193
  House of an Arab Merchant                                          195
  House of a Manyema Chief                                           196
  KitetÃ©, The Chief of Mpungu                                        198
  Village near KabungwÃ©                                              199
  Native Houses at Mtuyu                                             200
  Ants'-nest in Manyema                                              200
  Hill and Village on the Road to NyangwÃ©                            201
  Waiting to be Photographed                                         203
  A Young "Soko" (Gorilla)                                           204
  Blacksmiths at Work                                                205
  Native Trap for Game                                               206
  Canoes on the River                                                207
  "Heads for the North and the Lualaba; Tails for the South and
      Katanga."                                                      208
  A Follower of Tippu-Tib                                            209
  A Canoe of the Wenya, or Wagenya, Fishermen                        210
  Pot-pourri                                                         211
  View in NyangwÃ©                                                    212
  A Bowman                                                           213
  Camp Scene                                                         214
  Escort of Gunners and Spearmen                                     215
  Slave Offered in the Market                                        217
  NyangwÃ© Heads                                                      217
  NyangwÃ© Pottery                                                    218
  Muini Dugumbi's Followers Attacking NyangwÃ©                        219
  Antelope of the NyangwÃ© Region                                     220
  Near NyangwÃ©                                                       221
  Open Country before Reaching the Forest                            223
  Tippu-Tib's Body Servants                                          224
  Jumah                                                              225
  The Edge of the Forest                                             227
  Water-bottles                                                      228
  Stool of Uregga                                                    229
  Uregga House                                                       229
  Spoons of Uregga                                                   229
  Uregga Spear                                                       229
  Cane Settee                                                        229
  Bench                                                              230
  Back-rest                                                          230
  An African Fez of Leopard-skin                                     230
  Prickles of the Acacia Plant                                       231
  An African Ant                                                     231
  Marabouts, Storks, and Pelicans in the Forest Lakes                232
  A Forge and Smithy at Wane-Kirumbu, Uregga                         233
  A Young "Soko" Sitting for his Portrait                            235
  Head of the Gorilla                                                236
  Backgammon Tray                                                    236
  In Full Style                                                      237
  A Tributary River                                                  239
  Wangwana Women                                                     240
  Some of the People on Shore                                        241
  Canoes in the Mouth of the Ruiki River                             243
  War-hatchet of Ukusu                                               244
  Stool of Ukusu                                                     244
  Stew-pot of the Wahika                                             244
  Encounter with a Gorilla                                           245
  A House of Two Rooms                                               246
  Canoe Scoop                                                        247
  Scoops                                                             247
  "Towards the Unknown."                                             247
  Coil of Plaited Rope, Central Africa                               248
  War-drums of the Tribes of the Upper Livingstone                   249
  Village Scene                                                      250
  Musical Instruments and Mode of Playing                            251
  Gorillas and Nest                                                  253
  Native Pipe                                                        254
  Scene on a Tributary of the Great River--Launching a Canoe         255
  Mwana Ntaba Canoe (The "Crocodile")                                256
  Village near the Forest                                            257
  Native Corn-magazine                                               258
  African Stool                                                      259
  Spear-head                                                         260
  The Kooloo-Kamba, or Long-eared Soko                               261
  A Baswa Knife                                                      262
  Style of Knives                                                    262
  Baswa Basket and Cover                                             262
  Shooting a Crocodile at the Rapids                                 263
  Cavern near Stanley Falls                                          264
  The Desperate Situation of Zaidi, and his Rescue by Uledi, the
      Coxswain of the Boat                                           265
  The Seventh Cataract, Stanley Falls                                266
  Pike--Stanley Falls                                                266
  An African Suspension-bridge                                       267
  Fish--Seventh Cataract, Stanley Falls                              268
  Baswa Palm-oil Jar and Palm-wine Cooler                            268
  Mouth of Drum                                                      269
  Wooden Signal-drum of the Wenya, or Wagenya, and the Tribes on
      the Livingstone                                                269
  Drumsticks--Knobs being of India-rubber                            269
  Shields of Ituka People                                            269
  Fish--Stanley Falls                                                270
  Monster Canoe                                                      271
  Native Spade                                                       272
  The Fight below the Confluence of the Aruwimi and the Livingstone
      Rivers                                                         273
  Spear, Isangi                                                      274
  Knives, Rubunga                                                    274
  Rings for Protecting the Arm                                       275
  Rubunga Blacksmiths                                                276
  Double Iron Bells of Urangi                                        277
  Beak of the BalinÃ¦ceps Rex                                         278
  The BalinÃ¦ceps Rex                                                 279
  A Cannibal Chief                                                   281
  The Attack of the Sixty-three Canoes of the Piratical Bangala      283
  Poisoned Arrows                                                    284
  A Crocodile Hunt                                                   285
  Elephant Hunters on the Congo                                      287
  African Knife and Axes                                             288
  Spears, and Shield of Elephant-hide                                289
  Spectators among the Trees                                         291
  Encounter with a Hippopotamus                                      295
  A Present from Chumbiri                                            296
  The King of Chumbiri                                               296
  Great Pipe of King of Chumbiri                                     297
  One of the King's Wives at Chumbiri                                298
  A Bowman                                                           299
  Son of the King of Chumbiri                                        300
  A Python in an African Forest                                      301
  The Northern End of Stanley Pool                                   302
  Map of Stanley Pool                                                303
  One of the King's Warriors                                         304
  African Reclining-Chair                                            305
  A Present from Itsi                                                306
  Floating Island in Stanley Pool                                    308
  Village in the Valley of the Congo                                 309
  Native Pottery                                                     310
  View of the Right Branch, First Cataract, of the Livingstone
      Falls, from Four Miles below Juemba Island                     311
  Over Rocky Point close to Gampa's                                  312
  At Work Passing the Lower End of the First Cataract of the
      Livingstone Falls, near Rocky Island                           313
  African Pipes                                                      314
  Death of Kalulu                                                    315
  One of Gampa's Men                                                 316
  Village Idols                                                      317
  Hilly Regions back from the River                                  319
  _Lady Alice_ over the Falls                                        321
  Native Mill for Grinding Corn                                      322
  Falls on a Tributary Stream                                        323
  An Upland Stream and Native Bridge                                 324
  The NkenkÃ© River Entering the Livingstone below the _Lady Alice_
      Rapids                                                         325
  Mode of Passing Boats over the Falls                               327
  Village on the Table-land                                          329
  A Figure in the Market-place                                       330
  African Market Scene                                               331
  View in the BabwendÃ© Country                                       332
  Nyitti, an African Potato                                          333
  Ugogo Cooking-pot                                                  334
  Wild Bull of Equatorial Africa                                     334
  The New Canoes, the _Livingstone_ and the _Stanley_                336
  Cutting out the New _Livingstone_ Canoe                            337
  In Memoriam: Francis John Pocock                                   338
  Fall of the Edwin Arnold River into the Pocock Basin               339
  The Chief Carpenter Carried over Zinga Fall                        340
  The Masassa Falls, and the Entrance into Pocock Basin, or
      Bolobolo Pool                                                  341
  Camp at Kilolo, above Isangila Falls                               342
  View from the Table-land                                           343
  "I want Rum."                                                      345
  Village Scene, with Granary in Foreground                          346
  In the Valley                                                      347
  Ant-hills on the Road to Boma                                      348
  One of the Guides                                                  349
  Catching Ants for Food                                             350
  Mbinda Cemetery                                                    351
  In the Suburbs of Boma                                             352
  Outbuildings of an African Factory                                 353
  Escort of the Caravan                                              354
  Outside the Village                                                356
  View in the Open Country                                           357
  Wooden Idol                                                        358
  The White-fronted Wild Hog of Central Africa                       359
  The Hammock on the West Coast of Africa                            360
  The Circumnavigators of the Victoria Nyanza and Lake Tanganika,
      and Explorers of the Alexandra Nile and Livingstone (Congo)
      River                                                          361
  Native Belles on the West Coast                                    362
  Native Blacksmiths near Boma                                       363
  At Rest: Stanley's Quarters at Kabinda by the Sea                  365
  Expedition at Kabinda                                              366
  Group of Mr. Stanley's Followers at Kabinda, West Coast of
      Africa, just after Crossing the "Dark Continent."              367
  Scenery on the West Coast of Africa                                368
  A Dandy of San Paulo de Loanda                                     369
  View of San Paulo de Loanda--The Fort of San Miguel on the Right   371
  Dhows in the Harbor of Zanzibar                                    372
  The Recuperated and Reclad Expedition as it Appeared at Admiralty
      House, Simon's Town, after our Arrival on H. M. S. _Industry_  373
  The Women of the Expedition                                        377
  Stanley, as he Left England for Africa in 1874                     378
  Stanley, as he Reached Zanzibar in 1877                            379
  Ngahma, a Congo Chief                                              382
  View of Vivi, from the Isangila Road                               383
  Port of Leopoldville                                               384
  A Photograph                                                       385
  A Congo House                                                      386
  The Effect of Civilization                                         387
  A Native of the Lower Congo                                        388
  Emin Pasha                                                         391
  Blacksmith's Forge and Bellows                                     392
  Some of Emin Pasha's Irregular Troops                              393
  Ivory-eating Squirrel, Central Africa                              394
  Battle between Native Warriors and Egyptian Troops                 395
  Native Warrior in Emin Pasha's Province                            396
  The King of Unyora and his Great Chiefs                            397
  Native War-dance                                                   399
  Breed of Cattle in Emin Pasha's Province                           400
  Lado, Capital of Egyptian Equatorial Province                      401
  Schooli Warrior, Egyptian Equatorial Province                      402
  Fortified Village near Lado                                        403
  Ismaen Abou Hatab, Trusted Officer of Emin Pasha                   404
  Village in the Valley of the Bengo                                 405
  A Traveller's Caravan near Wadelay                                 407
  A Dyoor, Subject of Emin Pasha                                     408
  Chief of Coast Tribe in Portuguese Territory                       409
  Tattooing among the Coast Natives                                  410
  Doorway of a House at Mombasa                                      411
  Heads of Coast Natives                                             413
  View of Mombasa                                                    415
  Camp of an English Explorer in Africa                              417
  Slave Caravans on the Road                                         419
  Slaves Left to Die                                                 421
  A Spring in the Desert                                             423
  A Wedding-dance                                                    424
  Mandara's Left Ear                                                 426
  A Corner of Mr. Johnston's Settlement                              427
  View of Kilimanjaro                                                429
  Camp Scene                                                         430
  African Adjutants                                                  432
  A Well-stocked Hunting-ground                                      433
  Plain and Mountains in Masai Land                                  434
  Ear-stretchers and Ear-ornaments                                   436
  A Masai Warrior                                                    437
  Masai Married Woman, with Painted Face                             438
  Uganda Head-dress                                                  440
  Place where Bishop Hannington was Imprisoned and Killed            441
  African Oryx, or Gemsbok                                           442
  South African Hunting--in Camp                                     443
  Night Hunting--Elephants Coming to Drink                           445
  An African Serenade                                                446
  Close Shave by an Elephant                                         447
  Death-grapple with a Lion                                          448
  Rhinoceros and Dogs                                                450
  Dr. Livingstone in the Lion's Grasp                                451
  The Hopo, or Trap for Driving Game                                 453
  Paul du Chaillu in Africa                                          454
  Gorilla Hunting--Mother and Young at Play                          455
  Du Chaillu's First Gorilla                                         457
  Head of Kooloo-Kamba                                               458
  Ear of Kooloo-Kamba                                                458
  Du Chaillu Ascending an African River                              459
  Gorilla Skull                                                      461
  Human Skull                                                        461
  Skeletons of Man and the Gorilla                                   462
  A Young Gorilla--Du Chaillu's Captive                              463




[Illustration: Henry Stanley]




THE BOY TRAVELLERS

ON

THE CONGO.




CHAPTER I.

CROSSING THE ATLANTIC OCEAN WITH STANLEY.--"THROUGH THE DARK
CONTINENT."--AN IMPROMPTU GEOGRAPHICAL SOCIETY.--PERSONAL APPEARANCE OF
STANLEY.--COMMENTS UPON HIM BY FRANK AND FRED.--HOW THE GEOGRAPHICAL
SOCIETY WAS ORGANIZED.--READING STANLEY'S BOOK.--STANLEY'S
DEPARTURE FROM ENGLAND FOR ZANZIBAR.--JOINT ENTERPRISE OF TWO
NEWSPAPERS.--PREPARATIONS FOR THE EXPEDITION.--THE _LADY ALICE_.--BARKER
AND THE POCOCKS.--ZANZIBAR.--PRINCE BARGHASH.--INHABITANTS OF
ZANZIBAR.--THE WANGWANA.


At eight o'clock on the morning of December 15, 1886, the magnificent
steamer _Eider_, of the North German Lloyds, left her dock in New York
harbor for a voyage to Southampton and Bremen. Among the passengers that
gathered on her deck to wave farewell to friends on shore was one whose
name has become famous throughout the civilized world for the great work
he has performed in exploring the African continent and opening it to
commerce and Christianizing influences.

That man, it is hardly necessary to say, was HENRY M. STANLEY.

Near him stood a group of three individuals who will be recognized by
many of our readers. They were Doctor Bronson and his nephews, Frank
Bassett and Fred Bronson, whose adventures have been recorded in
previous volumes.[1]

[1] "The Boy Travellers in the Far East," in China, Japan, Siam, Java,
Ceylon, India, Egypt, the Holy Land, Africa; "The Boy Travellers in
South America;" "The Boy Travellers in the Russian Empire." Seven
volumes, published by Harper & Brothers, New York.

[Illustration: SANDY HOOK FROM NAVESINK LIGHT-HOUSE.]

Slowly the great steamer made her way among the ships at anchor in the
harbor. She passed the Narrows, then entered the Lower Bay, and, winding
through the channel between Sandy Hook and Coney Island, was soon upon
the open ocean. Near the Sandy Hook light-ship she stopped her engines
sufficiently long to discharge her pilot, and then, with her prow turned
to the eastward, she dashed away on her course at full speed. Day by day
and night by night the tireless engines throbbed and pulsated, but never
for a moment ceased their toil till the _Eider_ was off Southampton,
more than three thousand miles from her starting-point.

Doctor Bronson was acquainted with Mr. Stanley, and soon after the
steamer left the dock the two gentlemen were in conversation. After a
little while the doctor introduced his nephews, who were warmly greeted
by the great explorer; he had read of their journeys in the far East and
in other lands, and expressed his pleasure at meeting them personally.

As for Frank and Fred, they were overjoyed at the introduction and the
cordial manner in which they were received. They thanked Mr. Stanley for
the kind words he had used in speaking of their travels, which had been
of little consequence compared with his own. Frank added that he hoped
some day to be able to cross the African continent; the way had been
opened by Mr. Stanley, and, with the facilities which the latter had
given to travellers, the journey would be far easier of accomplishment
than it was twenty or even ten years ago.

Then followed a desultory conversation, of which no record has been
preserved; other passengers came up to speak to Mr. Stanley, and the
party separated. As the steamer passed into the open ocean most of the
people on deck disappeared below for the double reason that there was a
cold wind from the eastward and--breakfast was on the table.

"What a charming man Mr. Stanley is!" Fred remarked, as soon as they had
withdrawn from the group.

"Yes," replied his cousin, "and so different from what I expected he
would be. He is dignified without being haughty, and friendly without
familiarity. Before the introduction I was afraid to meet him, but found
myself quite at ease before we had been talking a minute. I'm not
surprised to hear how much those who know him are attached to him, nor
at the influence he possesses over the people among whom his great work
has been performed."

[Illustration: STANLEY IN ABYSSINIA.]

"Just think what a career he has had," continued Frank. "After various
adventures as a newspaper correspondent in Spain, Abyssinia, Ashantee,
and other countries, he was sent by the editor of the New York _Herald_
to find Dr. Livingstone in the interior of Africa. He found the famous
missionary; but when he came back, and told the story of what he had
done, a great many people refused to believe him, because they
considered the feat impossible for a newspaper correspondent. He came
out of Africa at the same point where he entered it, and it was said by
some that he had never ventured farther than a few miles from the coast.
This made him angry, and the next time he went on a tour of exploration
in Africa he made sure that the same criticism would be impossible."

"Yes, indeed!" responded Fred. "He went into the African wilderness at
Bagomoya, on the east side of the continent, and came out at the mouth
of the Congo, away over on the other side. He descended that great
river, which no white man had ever done before him, and passed through
dangers and difficulties such as few travellers of modern times have
known. And, besides--"

Before Fred could finish the sentence he had begun the Doctor joined
them, and asked Frank where he had put the parcel of books that they had
selected to read during the voyage.

"It is in our room," the youth replied, "and ready to be opened whenever
we want any of the books. We will arrange our things this forenoon, and
I will open the parcel at once."

"You selected Mr. Stanley's book, 'Through the Dark Continent,' I
believe," Doctor Bronson continued, "and I think you had better bring
that out first. Now that Mr. Stanley is with us, you will read it again
with much greater interest than before."

The youths were pleased with the suggestion, which they accepted at
once. Fred laughingly remarked that there might be danger of a quarrel
between them as to who should have the first privilege of reading the
book. Frank thought they could get over the difficulty by dividing the
two volumes between them, but he admitted that the one who read the
second volume in advance of the first would be likely to have his mind
confused as to the exact course of the exploration which the book
described.

[Illustration: MUSICIANS OF THE DARK CONTINENT.]

Doctor Bronson said he was reminded of an anecdote he once heard about
a man who always read books with a mark, which he carefully inserted at
the end of each reading. He was going through the "Life of Napoleon" at
one time, and for three evenings in succession his room-mate slyly set
back the mark to the starting-point. At the end of the third evening he
asked the reader what he thought of Napoleon.

"He was a most wonderful man," was the reply; "in three days he crossed
the Alps three times with his whole army, and went the same way every
time."

While the party were laughing over the anecdote Mr. Stanley came up, and
said he wished to have a share in the fun. The Doctor repeated the
story, and explained how it had been called to his mind.

"Well," said Mr. Stanley, "it would be very unfortunate for Masters
Frank and Fred to get the story of the Dark Continent doubled up in the
manner you suggest. I propose that they shall study it together, one
reading aloud to the other, and, as the entire book is too much for the
limited time of this voyage, they will be obliged to omit portions of
chapters here and there. The readings can take place daily during the
afternoon and evening, and the youth who is to read can devote the
forenoon to selecting the parts of the chapters he will suppress and
those which are to be given to the listeners. I will assist him in his
selections from time to time, and, with due diligence, the book will be
finished before we reach Southampton."

It was unanimously voted that the plan was an excellent one, and the
boys immediately proceeded to carry it out. The volumes were brought
forth, and Frank retired to a corner of the saloon to make a selection
for the first afternoon's reading. Mr. Stanley sat with him a short
time, marking several pages and paragraphs, and then went on deck, where
he joined Doctor Bronson in a brief promenade. Meantime Fred busied
himself with an examination of several other books of African travel; he
was evidently familiar with their contents, as he ran through the pages
with great rapidity, and marked numerous passages, with the evident
intention of referring to them in the course of the time devoted to what
we may call the public readings.

There was an intermission of labor towards the middle of the day, and at
this time Frank and Fred made the acquaintance of two or three other
youths of about their age. When the latter learned of the proposed
scheme, they asked permission to be allowed to hear how the Dark
Continent was traversed, and their request was readily granted.
Consequently the audience that assembled in the afternoon comprised some
six or eight persons, including Mr. Stanley and Doctor Bronson. Neither
of the gentlemen remained there through the whole afternoon, partly for
the reason that they were both familiar with the narrative and partly
because they did not wish to seem otherwise than confident that the boys
knew how to manage matters for themselves. This kind of work was not
altogether new to Frank and Fred, as many of our readers are aware; and
in all their previous experiences they had acquitted themselves
admirably.

When everything was ready Frank began with the opening chapter of
"Through the Dark Continent" and read as follows:

     "While returning to England in April, 1874, from the Ashantee War,
     the news reached me that Livingstone was dead--that his body was on
     its way to England!

     [Illustration: VILLAGE WHERE DR. LIVINGSTONE DIED.]

     "Livingstone had then fallen! He was dead! He had died by the
     shores of Lake Bemba, on the threshold of the dark region he had
     wished to explore! The work he had promised me to perform was only
     begun when death overtook him!

     "The effect which this news had upon me, after the first shock had
     passed away, was to fire me with a resolution to complete his work,
     to be, if God willed it, the next martyr to geographical science,
     or, if my life was to be spared, to clear up not only the secrets
     of the Great River throughout its course, but also all that
     remained still problematic and incomplete of the discoveries of
     Burton and Speke, and Speke and Grant.

     "The solemn day of the burial of the body of my great friend
     arrived. I was one of the pall-bearers in Westminster Abbey, and
     when I had seen the coffin lowered into the grave, and had heard
     the first handful of earth thrown over it, I walked away sorrowing
     over the fate of David Livingstone.

     "Soon after this I was passing by an old book-shop, and observed a
     volume bearing the singular title of 'How to Observe.' Upon opening
     it, I perceived it contained tolerably clear instructions of 'how
     and what to observe.' It was very interesting, and it whetted my
     desire to know more; it led me to purchase quite an extensive
     library of books upon Africa, its geography, geology, botany, and
     ethnology. I thus became possessed of over one hundred and thirty
     books upon Africa, which I studied with the zeal of one who had a
     living interest in the subject, and with the understanding of one
     who had been already four times on that continent. I knew what had
     been accomplished by African explorers, and I knew how much of the
     dark interior was still unknown to the world. Until late hours I
     sat up, inventing and planning, sketching out routes, laying out
     lengthy lines of possible exploration, noting many suggestions
     which the continued study of my project created. I also drew up
     lists of instruments and other paraphernalia that would be required
     to map, lay out, and describe the new regions to be traversed.

     "I had strolled over one day to the office of the _Daily
     Telegraph_, full of the subject. While I was discussing
     journalistic enterprise in general with one of the staff, the
     editor entered. We spoke of Livingstone and the unfinished task
     remaining behind him. In reply to an eager remark which I made, he
     asked:

     "'Could you, and would you, complete the work? And what is there to
     do?'

     "I answered:

     "The outlet of Lake Tanganika is undiscovered. We know nothing
     scarcely--except what Speke has sketched out--of Lake Victoria; we
     do not even know whether it consists of one or many lakes, and
     therefore the sources of the Nile are still unknown. Moreover, the
     western half of the African continent is still a white blank.'

     "'Do you think you can settle all this, if we commission you?'

     "'While I live there will be something done. If I survive the time
     required to perform all the work, all shall be done.'

     [Illustration: JAMES GORDON BENNETT.]

     "The matter was for the moment suspended, because Mr. James Gordon
     Bennett, of the New York _Herald_, had prior claims on my services.

     "A telegram was despatched to New York to him: 'Would he join the
     _Daily Telegraph_ in sending Stanley out to Africa, to complete the
     discoveries of Speke, Burton, and Livingstone?' and, within
     twenty-four hours, my 'new mission' to Africa was determined on as
     a joint expedition, by the laconic answer which the cable flashed
     under the Atlantic: 'Yes; Bennett.'

     "A few days before I departed for Africa, the _Daily Telegraph_
     announced in a leading article that its proprietors had united with
     Mr. James Gordon Bennett in organizing an expedition of African
     discovery, under the command of Mr. Henry M. Stanley. 'The purpose
     of the enterprise,' it said, 'is to complete the work left
     unfinished by the lamented death of Dr. Livingstone; to solve, if
     possible, the remaining problems of the geography of Central
     Africa; and to investigate and report upon the haunts of the
     slave-traders.... He will represent the two nations whose common
     interest in the regeneration of Africa was so well illustrated when
     the lost English explorer was rediscovered by the energetic
     American correspondent. In that memorable journey, Mr. Stanley
     displayed the best qualities of an African traveller; and with no
     inconsiderable resources at his disposal to reinforce his own
     complete acquaintance with the conditions of African travel, it may
     be hoped that very important results will accrue from this
     undertaking to the advantage of science, humanity, and
     civilization.'

     "Two weeks were allowed me for purchasing boats--a yawl, a gig, and
     a barge--for giving orders for pontoons, and purchasing equipment,
     guns, ammunition, rope, saddles, medical stores, and provisions;
     for making investments in gifts for native chiefs; for obtaining
     scientific instruments, stationery, etc., etc. The barge was an
     invention of my own.

     [Illustration: THE "LADY ALICE" IN SECTIONS.]

     "It was to be forty feet long, six feet beam, and thirty inches
     deep, of Spanish cedar three eighths of an inch thick. When
     finished, it was to be separated into five sections, each of which
     should be eight feet long. If the sections should be overweight,
     they were to be again divided into halves for greater facility of
     carriage. The construction of this novel boat was undertaken by Mr.
     James Messenger, boat-builder, of Teddington, near London. The
     pontoons were made by Cording, but though the workmanship was
     beautiful, they were not a success, because the superior efficiency
     of the boat for all purposes rendered them unnecessary. However,
     they were not wasted. Necessity compelled us, while in Africa, to
     employ them for far different purposes from those for which they
     had originally been designed.

     "There lived a clerk at the Langham Hotel, of the name of Frederick
     Barker, who, smitten with a desire to go to Africa, was not to be
     dissuaded by reports of its unhealthy climate, its dangerous
     fevers, or the uncompromising views of exploring life given to him.
     'He would go, he was determined to go,' he said.

     "Mr. Edwin Arnold, of the _Daily Telegraph_, also suggested that I
     should be accompanied by one or more young English boatmen of good
     character, on the ground that their river knowledge would be
     extremely useful to me. He mentioned his wish to a most worthy
     fisherman, named Henry Pocock, of Lower Upnor, Kent, who had kept
     his yacht for him, and who had fine stalwart sons, who bore the
     reputation of being honest and trustworthy. Two of these young men
     volunteered at once. Both Mr. Arnold and myself warned the Pocock
     family repeatedly that Africa had a cruel character, that the
     sudden change from the daily comforts of English life to the
     rigorous one of an explorer would try the most perfect
     constitution; would most likely be fatal to the uninitiated and
     unacclimatized. But I permitted myself to be overborne by the eager
     courage and devotion of these adventurous lads, and Francis John
     Pocock and Edward Pocock, two very likely-looking young men, were
     accordingly engaged as my assistants.

     [Illustration: CANDIDATES FOR SERVICE WITH STANLEY.]

     "Soon after the announcement of the 'New Mission,' applications by
     the score poured into the offices of the _Daily Telegraph_ and New
     York _Herald_ for employment. Before I sailed from England, over
     twelve hundred letters were received from 'generals,' 'colonels,'
     'captains,' 'lieutenants,' 'mid-shipmen,' 'engineers,'
     'commissioners of hotels,' mechanics, waiters, cooks, servants,
     somebodies and nobodies, spiritual mediums and magnetizers, etc.,
     etc. They all knew Africa, were perfectly acclimatized, were quite
     sure they would please me, would do important services, save me
     from any number of troubles by their ingenuity and resources, take
     me up in balloons or by flying carriages, make us all invisible by
     their magic arts, or by the 'science of magnetism' would cause all
     savages to fall asleep while we might pass anywhere without
     trouble. Indeed, I feel sure that, had enough money been at my
     disposal at that time, I might have led 5000 Englishmen, 5000
     Americans, 2000 Frenchmen, 2000 Germans, 500 Italians, 250 Swiss,
     200 Belgians, 50 Spaniards, and 5 Greeks, or 15,005 Europeans, to
     Africa. But the time had not arrived to depopulate Europe, and
     colonize Africa on such a scale, and I was compelled to
     respectfully decline accepting the valuable services of the
     applicants, and to content myself with Francis John and Edward
     Pocock, and Frederick Barker--whose entreaties had been seconded by
     his mother.

     "I was agreeably surprised also, before departure, at the great
     number of friends I possessed in England, who testified their
     friendship substantially by presenting me with useful 'tokens of
     their regard' in the shape of canteens, watches, water-bottles,
     pipes, pistols, knives, pocket-companions, manifold writers,
     cigars, packages of medicine, Bibles, prayer-books, English tracts
     for the dissemination of religious knowledge among the black
     pagans, poems, tiny silk banners, gold rings, etc., etc. A lady for
     whom I have a reverent respect presented me also with a magnificent
     prize mastiff named Castor, an English officer presented me with
     another, and at the Dogs' Home at Battersea I purchased a
     retriever, a bull-dog, and a bull-terrier, called respectively by
     the Pococks, Nero, Bull, and Jack.

     "On the 15th of August, 1874, having shipped the Europeans, boats,
     dogs, and general property of the expedition, I left England for
     the east coast of Africa to begin my explorations."

Here Frank paused and informed his listeners that he would not read in
full the chapter which followed, as they could not readily comprehend it
without the aid of a map. "It contains," he said, "a summary of the
history of the expeditions that have sought to find the sources of the
Nile from the days of Herodotus to the present time, the accounts of the
discoveries of the Central African lakes and of the Nile flowing from
the northern end of Lake Victoria, together with a statement of the
knowledge which Dr. Livingstone possessed concerning the Congo River and
its course. At the end of the chapter Mr. Stanley repeats his proposal
to solve the problems concerning the extent of Lakes Tanganika and
Victoria, to find the outlet of the former, and determine whether the
great river which Livingston saw was the Nile, the Niger, or the Congo.
And now we will see," continued the youth, "how Mr. Stanley entered the
African continent on his great exploration."

With these words he referred again to the book, and read as follows:

     "Twenty-eight months had elapsed between my departure from Zanzibar
     after the discovery of Livingstone and my rearrival on that island,
     September 21, 1874.

     [Illustration: VIEW OF A PORTION OF THE SEA-FRONT OF ZANZIBAR, FROM
     THE WATER BATTERY TO SHANGANI POINT.]

     "The well-remembered undulating ridges, and the gentle slopes clad
     with palms and mango-trees bathed in warm vapor, seemed in that
     tranquil, drowsy state which at all times any portion of tropical
     Africa presents at first appearance. A pale-blue sky covered the
     hazy land and sleeping sea as we steamed through the strait that
     separates Zanzibar from the continent. Every stranger, at first
     view of the shores, proclaims his pleasure. The gorgeous verdure,
     the distant purple ridges, the calm sea, the light gauzy
     atmosphere, the semi-mysterious silence which pervades all nature,
     evoke his admiration. For it is probable that he has sailed through
     the stifling Arabian Sea, with the grim, frowning mountains of
     Nubia on the one hand, and on the other the drear, ochreous-colored
     ridges of the Arab peninsula; and perhaps the aspect of the
     thirsty volcanic rocks of Aden and the dry, brown bluffs of
     Guardafui is still fresh in his memory.

     [Illustration: ZANZIBAR, FROM THE SEA.]

     "The stranger, of course, is intensely interested in the life
     existing near the African equator, now first revealed to him, and
     all that he sees and hears of figures and faces and sounds is being
     freshly impressed on his memory. Figures and faces are picturesque
     enough. Happy, pleased-looking men of black, yellow, or tawny
     color, with long, white cotton shirts, move about with quick,
     active motion, and cry out, regardless of order, to their friends
     or mates in the Swahili or Arabic language, and their friends or
     mates respond with equally loud voice and lively gesture, until,
     with fresh arrivals, there appears to be a Babel created, wherein
     English, French, Swahili, and Arabic accents mix with Hindi, and,
     perhaps, Persian.

     [Illustration: RED CLIFFS BEHIND UNIVERSITIES MISSION, ZANZIBAR.]

     "In the midst of such a scene I stepped into a boat to be rowed to
     the house of my old friend, Mr. Augustus Sparhawk, of the Bertram
     Agency. I was welcomed with all the friendliness and hospitality of
     my first visit, when, three years and a half previously, I arrived
     at Zanzibar to set out for the discovery of Livingstone.

     "With Mr. Sparhawk's aid I soon succeeded in housing comfortably my
     three young Englishmen, Francis John and Edward Pocock and
     Frederick Barker, and my five dogs, and in stowing safely on shore
     the yawl _Wave_, the gig, and the tons of goods, provisions, and
     stores I had brought.

     [Illustration: VIEW FROM THE ROOF OF MR. AUGUSTUS SPARHAWK'S HOUSE.

     Frank Pocock. Frederick Barker. A Zanzibar boy. Edward Pocock.
     Kalula.

     Bull-terrier "Jack." "Bull." Retriever "Nero." Mastiff "Captain."
     Prize Mastiff "Castor."

     (_From a Photograph by Mr. Stanley._)]

     "Life at Zanzibar is a busy one to the intending explorer. Time
     flies rapidly, and each moment of daylight must be employed in the
     selection and purchase of the various kinds of cloth, beads, and
     wire in demand by the different tribes of the mainland through
     whose countries he purposes journeying. Strong, half-naked porters
     come in with great bales of unbleached cottons, striped and colored
     fabrics, handkerchiefs and red caps, bags of blue, green, red,
     white, and amber-colored beads, small and large, round and oval,
     and coils upon coils of thick brass wire. These have to be
     inspected, assorted, arranged, and numbered separately, have to be
     packed in portable bales, sacks, or packages, or boxed, according
     to their character and value. The house-floors are littered with
     cast-off wrappings and covers, box-lids, and a medley of rejected
     paper, cloth, zinc covers, and broken boards, sawdust, and other
     _dÃ©bris_. Porters and servants and masters, employees and
     employers, pass backward and forward, to and fro, amid all this
     litter, roll bales over, or tumble about boxes; and a rending of
     cloth or paper, clattering of hammers, demands for the
     marking-pots, or the number of bale and box, with quick, hurried
     breathing and shouting, are heard from early morning until night.

     [Illustration: THE BRITISH CONSULATE AT ZANZIBAR.]

     "During the day the beach throughout its length is alive with the
     moving figures of porters, bearing clove and cinnamon bags, ivory,
     copal and other gums, and hides, to be shipped in the lighters
     waiting along the water's edge, with sailors from the shipping, and
     black boatmen discharging the various imports on the sand. In the
     evening the beach is crowded with the naked forms of workmen and
     boys from the 'go-downs,' preparing to bathe and wash the dust of
     copal and hides off their bodies in the surf. Some of the Arab
     merchants have ordered chairs on the piers, or bunders, to chat
     sociably until the sun sets, and prayer-time has come. Boats hurry
     by with their masters and sailors returning to their respective
     vessels. Dhows move sluggishly past, hoisting as they go the
     creaking yards of their lateen sails, bound for the mainland ports.
     Zanzibar canoes and 'matepes' are arriving with wood and produce,
     and others of the same native form and make are squaring their mat
     sails, outward bound. Sunset approaches, and after sunset silence
     follows soon. For as there are no wheeled carriages with the
     eternal rumble of their traffic in Zanzibar, with the early evening
     comes early peace and rest.

     [Illustration: SEYYID BARGHASH.]

     "Barghash bin Sayid, the Sultan of Zanzibar, heartily approved the
     objects of the expedition and gave it practical aid. It is
     impossible not to feel a kindly interest in Prince Barghash, and to
     wish him complete success in the reforms he is now striving to
     bring about in his country. Here we see an Arab prince, educated in
     the strictest school of Islam, and accustomed to regard the black
     natives of Africa as the lawful prey of conquest or lust, and fair
     objects of barter, suddenly turning round at the request of
     European philanthropists and becoming one of the most active
     opponents of the slave-trade--and the spectacle must necessarily
     create for him many well-wishers and friends.

     "The prince must be considered as an independent sovereign. His
     territories include, besides the Zanzibar, Pemba, and Mafia
     islands, nearly 1000 miles of coast, and extend probably over an
     area of 20,000 square miles, with a population of half a million.
     The products of Zanzibar have enriched many Europeans who traded in
     them. Cloves, cinnamon, tortoise-shell, pepper, copal gum, ivory,
     orchilla weed, india-rubber, and hides have been exported for
     years; but this catalogue does not indicate a tithe of what might
     be produced by the judicious investment of capital. Those intending
     to engage in commercial enterprises would do well to study works on
     Mauritius, Natal, and the Portuguese territories, if they wish to
     understand what these fine, fertile lands are capable of. The
     cocoa-nut palm flourishes at Zanzibar and on the mainland, the oil
     palm thrives luxuriantly in Pemba, and sugar-cane will grow
     everywhere. Caoutchouc remains undeveloped in the maritime belts of
     woodland, and the acacia forests, with their wealth of gums, are
     nearly untouched. Rice is sown on the Rufiji banks, and yields
     abundantly; cotton would thrive in any of the rich river bottoms;
     and then there are, besides, the grains, millet, Indian corn, and
     many others, the cultivation of which, though only in a languid
     way, the natives understand. The cattle, coffee, and goats of the
     interior await also the energetic man of capital and the commercial
     genius.

     "Those whom we call the Arabs of Zanzibar are either natives of
     Muscat who have immigrated thither to seek their fortunes, or
     descendants of the conquerors of the Portuguese; many of them are
     descended from the Arab conquerors who accompanied Seyyid Sultan,
     the grandfather of the present Seyyid Barghash. While many of these
     descendants of the old settlers still cling to their homesteads,
     farms, and plantations, and acquire sufficient competence by the
     cultivation of cloves, cinnamon, oranges, cocoa-nut palms,
     sugar-cane, and other produce, a great number have emigrated into
     the interior to form new colonies. Hamed Ibrahim has been eighteen
     years in KaragwÃ©, Muini Kheri has been thirty years in Ujiji,
     Sultan bin Ali has been twenty-five years in UnyanyembÃ©, Muini
     Dugumbi has been eight years in NyangwÃ©, Juma Merikani has been
     seven years in Rua, and a number of other prominent Arabs may be
     cited to prove that, though they themselves firmly believe that
     they will return to the coast some day, there are too many reasons
     for believing that they never will.

     "The Arabs of Zanzibar, whether from more frequent intercourse with
     Europeans or from other causes, are undoubtedly the best of their
     race. More easily amenable to reason than those of Egypt, or the
     shy, reserved, and bigoted fanatics of Arabia, they offer no
     obstacles to the European traveller, but are sociable, frank,
     good-natured, and hospitable. In business they are keen traders,
     and of course will exact the highest percentage of profit out of
     the unsuspecting European if they are permitted. They are stanch
     friends and desperate haters. Blood is seldom satisfied without
     blood, unless extraordinary sacrifices are made. The conduct of an
     Arab gentleman is perfect. Impertinence is hushed instantly by the
     elders, and rudeness is never permitted.

     [Illustration: A ZANZIBAR NURSE-MAID.]

     "After the Arabs let us regard the Wangwana, or negro natives of
     Zanzibar, just as in Europe, after studying the condition and
     character of the middle-classes, we might turn to reflect upon that
     of the laboring population.

     "After nearly seven years' acquaintance with the Wangwana, I have
     come to perceive that they represent in their character much of the
     disposition of a large portion of the negro tribes of the
     continent. I find them capable of great love and affection, and
     possessed of gratitude and other noble traits of human nature; I
     know, too, that they can be made good, obedient servants, that many
     are clever, honest, industrious, docile, enterprising, brave, and
     moral; that they are, in short, equal to any other race or color on
     the face of the globe, in all the attributes of manhood. But to be
     able to perceive their worth, the traveller must bring an
     unprejudiced judgment, a clear, fresh, and patient observation, and
     must forget that lofty standard of excellence upon which he and his
     race pride themselves, before he can fairly appreciate the
     capabilities of the Zanzibar negro. The traveller should not forget
     the origin of his own race, the condition of the Briton before St.
     Augustine visited his country, but should rather recall to mind the
     first state of the 'wild Caledonian,' and the original
     circumstances and surroundings of primitive man.

     "Being, I hope, free from prejudices of caste, color, race, or
     nationality, and endeavoring to pass what I believe to be a just
     judgment upon the negroes of Zanzibar, I find that they are a
     people just emerged into the Iron Epoch, and now thrust forcibly
     under the notice of nations who have left them behind by the
     improvements of over four thousand years. They possess beyond doubt
     all the vices of a people still fixed deeply in barbarism, but they
     understand to the full what and how low such a state is; it is,
     therefore, a duty imposed upon us by the religion we profess, and
     by the sacred command of the Son of God, to help them out of the
     deplorable state they are now in. At any rate, before we begin to
     hope for the improvement of races so long benighted, let us leave
     off this impotent bewailing of their vices, and endeavor to
     discover some of the virtues they possess as men, for it must be
     with the aid of their virtues, and not by their vices, that the
     missionary of civilization can ever hope to assist them.

     [Illustration: LADY OF ZANZIBAR READING AN ARABIC MANUSCRIPT.]

     "It is to the Wangwana that Livingstone, Burton, Speke, and Grant
     owe, in great part, the accomplishment of their objects, and while
     in the employ of those explorers, this race rendered great services
     to geography. From a considerable distance north of the equator
     down to the Zambezi and across Africa to Benguella and the mouth of
     the Congo, or Livingstone, they have made their names familiar to
     tribes who, but for the Wangwana, would have remained ignorant to
     this day of all things outside their own settlements. They possess,
     with many weaknesses, many fine qualities. While very
     superstitious, easily inclined to despair, and readily giving ear
     to vague, unreasonable fears, they may also, by judicious
     management, be induced to laugh at their own credulity and roused
     to a courageous attitude, to endure like stoics, and fight like
     heroes. It will depend altogether upon the leader of a body of
     such men whether their worst or best qualities shall prevail.

     [Illustration: NATIVE WATER-CARRIER, ZANZIBAR.]

     "There is another class coming into notice from the interior of
     Africa, who, though of a sterner nature, will, I am convinced, as
     they are better known, become greater favorites than the Wangwana.
     I refer to the Wanyamwezi, or the natives of Unyamwezi, and the
     Wasukuma, or the people of Usukuma. Naturally, being a grade less
     advanced towards civilization than the Wangwana, they are not so
     amenable to discipline as the latter. While explorers would in the
     present state of acquaintance prefer the Wangwana as escort, the
     Wanyamwezi are far superior as porters. Their greater freedom from
     diseases, their greater strength and endurance, the pride they take
     in their profession of porters, prove them born travellers of
     incalculable use and benefit to Africa. If kindly treated, I do not
     know more docile and good-natured creatures. Their skill in war,
     tenacity of purpose, and determination to defend the rights of
     their elected chief against foreigners, have furnished themes for
     song to the bards of Central Africa. The English discoverer of
     Lake Tanganika and, finally, I myself have been equally indebted to
     them, both on my first and last expeditions.

     "From their numbers, and their many excellent qualities, I am led
     to think that the day will come when they will be regarded as
     something better than the 'best of pagazis;' that they will be
     esteemed as the good subjects of some enlightened power, who will
     train them up as the nucleus of a great African nation, as powerful
     for the good of the Dark Continent, as they threaten, under the
     present condition of things, to be for its evil."

Here Frank paused and announced an intermission of ten minutes, to
enable the reader to rest a little. During the intermission the youths
discussed what they had heard, and agreed unanimously that the
description of Zanzibar and its people and their ruler was very
interesting.

[Illustration: HINDOO MERCHANT OF ZANZIBAR.]




CHAPTER II.

TRANSPORTATION IN AFRICA.--MEN AS BEASTS OF BURDEN.--PORTERS, AND THEIR
PECULIARITIES.--ENGAGING MEN FOR THE EXPEDITION.--A _SHAURI_.--TROUBLES
WITH THE _LADY ALICE_.--AGREEMENT BETWEEN STANLEY AND HIS
MEN.--DEPARTURE FROM ZANZIBAR.--BAGAMOYO.--THE UNIVERSITIES
MISSION.--DEPARTURE OF THE EXPEDITION.--DIFFICULTIES WITH THE
PORTERS.--SUFFERINGS ON THE MARCH.--NATIVE SUSPENSION-BRIDGES.--SHOOTING
A ZEBRA.--LOSSES BY DESERTION.


Before the reading was resumed, one of the youths asked if Zanzibar was
the usual starting-point for expeditions for the exploration of Africa.
Mr. Stanley was absent at the moment the question was asked, but the
answer was readily given by Doctor Bronson.

"Zanzibar is the usual starting-point," said the Doctor, "but it is by
no means the only one. Livingstone's expedition for exploring the
Zambesi River set out from Zanzibar, and so did other expeditions of the
great missionary. Burton and Speke started from there in 1856, when they
discovered Lake Tanganika; and, four years later, Speke and Grant set
out from the same place. Lieutenant Cameron, in his journey across
Africa, made Zanzibar his starting point; and the expedition of Mr.
Johnson to the Kilimandjaro Mountain was chiefly outfitted there, though
it left the coast at Mombasa.

"Zanzibar," continued Doctor Bronson, "is the best point of departure
for an inland expedition anywhere along the east coast of Africa, for
the reason that it is the largest and most important place of trade. Its
shops are well supplied with the goods that an explorer needs for his
journey, and its merchants have a better reputation than those of other
African ports. Everything in the interior of Africa must be carried on
the backs of men, there being, as yet, no other system of
transportation. Horses cannot live in certain parts of the interior of
Africa, owing to the tsetse-fly, which kills them with its bites; and
even were it not for this fly, it is likely that the heat of the climate
would render them of little use. Occasionally, a traveller endeavors to
use donkeys as beasts of burden, but these animals are scarce and dear,
and of much less use than in other lands. Until Africa is provided with
railways--and that will not be for a long while yet--the transportation
must be done by men. Every caravan that leaves the coast for the
interior of the continent requires a large number of porters; and the
difficulty of obtaining them is one of the greatest annoyances to
merchants and travellers."

[Illustration: NEGRO NURSE-MAID, ZANZIBAR.]

One of the youths said he supposed it was because the demand was so
great that there was not a sufficient number of men.

"Not at all," replied the Doctor. "There are plenty of men in Africa,
but they are not particularly anxious to work. Their wants are few, and
they can live upon very little; consequently they are not over-desirous
to go on a journey of several hundred miles and carry heavy burdens on
their shoulders or heads. Added to their laziness is a lack of a feeling
of responsibility or of honor. After engaging to go on a journey they
fail to appear at the appointed time, and whenever they are weary of
their work they coolly drop their burdens at the side of the road and
make off into the bushes. In the first few days of a journey a traveller
is always deserted by many of his porters, and it is only when he gets
far from the coast and has possibly entered an enemy's country that he
can keep his men together. All travellers have the same story to tell,
and they all agree that the Zanzibari porters are the most faithful of
all in keeping their engagements, or, to say it better, the least
unfaithful. For this reason, also, Zanzibar is a favorite starting-point
for explorers. Frank will now read to us about the difficulties which
Mr. Stanley encountered in outfitting his expedition."

[Illustration: A ZANZIBAR BRIDE.]

Acting upon this hint, Frank opened the book and read as follows:

     "It is a most sobering employment, the organizing of an African
     expedition. You are constantly engaged, mind and body; now in
     casting up accounts, and now travelling to and fro hurriedly to
     receive messengers, inspecting purchases, bargaining with
     keen-eyed, relentless Hindi merchants, writing memoranda, haggling
     over extortionate prices, packing up a multitude of small
     utilities, pondering upon your lists of articles, wanted,
     purchased, and unpurchased, groping about in the recesses of a
     highly exercised imagination for what you ought to purchase, and
     can not do without, superintending, arranging, assorting, and
     packing. And this under a temperature of 95Â° Fahr.

     "In the midst of all this terrific, high-pressure exercise arrives
     the first batch of applicants for employment. For it has long ago
     been bruited abroad that I am ready to enlist all able-bodied human
     beings willing to carry a load. Ever since I arrived at Zanzibar I
     have had a very good reputation among Arabs and Wangwana. They have
     not forgotten that it was I who found the 'old white
     man'--Livingstone--in Ujiji, nor that liberality and kindness to my
     men were my special characteristics. They have also, with the true
     Oriental spirit of exaggeration, proclaimed that I was but a few
     months absent; and that, after this brief excursion, they returned
     to their homes to enjoy the liberal pay awarded them, feeling
     rather the better for the trip than otherwise. This unsought-for
     reputation brought on me the laborious task of selecting proper men
     out of an extraordinary number of applicants. Almost all the
     cripples, the palsied, the consumptive, and the superannuated that
     Zanzibar could furnish applied to be enrolled on the muster-list,
     but these, subjected to a searching examination, were refused. Hard
     upon their heels came all the roughs, rowdies, and ruffians of the
     island, and these, schooled by their fellows, were not so easily
     detected. Slaves were also refused, as being too much under the
     influence and instruction of their masters, and yet many were
     engaged of whose character I had not the least conception, until,
     months afterwards, I learned from their quarrels in the camp how I
     had been misled by the clever rogues.

     [Illustration: WINDOW OF AN ARAB HOUSE, ZANZIBAR.]

     "All those who bore good characters on the Search Expedition, and
     had been despatched to the assistance of Livingstone in 1872, were
     employed without delay. Out of these the chiefs were selected:
     these were Manwa Sera, Chowpereh, Wadi Rehani, KachÃ©chÃ©, Zaidi,
     Chakanja, Farjalla, Wadi Safeni, Bukhet, Mabruki Manyapara, Mabruki
     UnyanyembÃ©, Muini PembÃ©, Ferahan, Bwana Muri, Khamseen, Mabruki
     Speke, Simba, Gardner, Hamoidah, Zaidi Mganda, and Ulimengo.

     [Illustration: COXSWAIN ULEDI, AND MANWA SERA, CHIEF CAPTAIN.

     (_From a Photograph._)]

     "All great enterprises require a preliminary deliberative palaver,
     or, as the Wangwana call it, 'Shauri.' In East Africa,
     particularly, shauris are much in vogue. Precipitate, energetic
     action is dreaded. '_Poli, poli!_' or 'Gently!' is the warning
     word of caution given.

     "The chiefs arranged themselves in a semicircle on the day of the
     shauri, and I sat _Ã  la Turque_ fronting them. 'What is it, my
     friends? Speak your minds.' They hummed and hawed, looked at one
     another, as if on their neighbor's faces they might discover the
     purport of their coming, but, all hesitating to begin, finally
     broke down in a loud laugh.

     "Manwa Sera, always grave, unless hit dexterously with a joke,
     hereupon affected anger, and said, '_You_ speak, son of Safeni;
     verily we act like children! Will the master eat us?'

     "Wadi, son of Safeni, thus encouraged to perform the spokesman's
     duty, hesitates exactly two seconds, and then ventures with
     diplomatic blandness and _graciosity_. 'We have come, master, with
     words. Listen. It is well we should know every step before we leap.
     A traveller journeys not without knowing whither he wanders. We
     have come to ascertain what lands you are bound for.'

     "Imitating the son of Safeni's gracious blandness, and his low tone
     of voice, as though the information about to be imparted to the
     intensely interested and eagerly listening group were too important
     to speak it loud, I described in brief outline the prospective
     journey, in broken Kiswahili. As country after country was
     mentioned of which they had hitherto had but vague ideas, and river
     after river, lake after lake named, all of which I hoped with their
     trusty aid to explore carefully, various ejaculations expressive of
     wonder or joy, mixed with a little alarm, broke from their lips,
     but when I concluded, each of the group drew a long breath, and
     almost simultaneously they uttered, admiringly, 'Ah, fellows, this
     is a journey worthy to be called a journey!'

     [Illustration: A MERCHANT OF ZANZIBAR.]

     "'But, master,' said they, after recovering themselves, 'this long
     journey will take years to travel--six, nine, or ten years.'
     'Nonsense,' I replied. 'Six, nine, or ten years! What can you be
     thinking of? It takes the Arabs nearly three years to reach Ujiji,
     it is true, but, if you remember, I was but sixteen months from
     Zanzibar to Ujiji and back. Is it not so?' 'Ay, true,' they
     answered. 'Very well, and I assure you I have not come to live in
     Africa. I have come simply to see those rivers and lakes, and after
     I have seen them to return home. You remember while going to Ujiji
     I permitted the guide to show the way, but when we were returning
     who was it that led the way? Was it not I, by means of that little
     compass which could not lie like the guide?' 'Ay, true, master,
     true every word!' 'Very well, then, let us finish the shauri, and
     go. To-morrow we will make a proper agreement before the consul;'
     and, in Scriptural phrase, 'they forthwith arose and did as they
     were commanded.'

     "Upon receiving information from the coast that there was a very
     large number of men waiting for me, I became still more fastidious
     in my choice. But with all my care and gift of selection, I was
     mortified to discover that many faces and characters had baffled
     the rigorous scrutiny to which I had subjected them, and that some
     scores of the most abandoned and depraved characters on the island
     had been enlisted by me on the expedition. One man, named Msenna,
     imposed upon me by assuming such a contrite, penitent look, and
     weeping such copious tears, when I informed him that he had too bad
     a character to be employed, that my good-nature was prevailed upon
     to accept his services, upon the understanding that, if he indulged
     his murderous propensities in Africa, I should return him chained
     the entire distance to Zanzibar, to be dealt with by his prince. He
     delivered his appeal with impassioned accents and lively gestures,
     which produced a great effect upon the mixed audience who listened
     to him, and, gathering from their faces more than from my own
     convictions that he had been much abused and very much
     misunderstood, his services were accepted, and as he appeared to be
     an influential man, he was appointed a junior captain with
     prospects of promotion and higher pay.

     "Subsequently, however, on the shores of Lake Victoria it was
     discovered--for in Africa people are uncommonly communicative--that
     Msenna had murdered eight people, that he was a ruffian of the
     worst sort, and that the merchants of Zanzibar had experienced
     great relief when they heard that the notorious Msenna was about to
     bid farewell for a season to the scene of so many of his wild
     exploits. Msenna was only one of many of his kind, but I have given
     in detail the manner of his enlistment that my position may be
     better understood.

     "The weight of a porter's load should not exceed sixty pounds. On
     the arrival of the sectional exploring boat _Lady Alice_, great
     were my vexation and astonishment when I discovered that four of
     the sections weighed two hundred and eighty pounds each, and that
     one weighed three hundred and ten pounds! She was, it is true, a
     marvel of workmanship, and an exquisite model of a boat, such,
     indeed, as few builders in England or America could rival, but in
     her present condition her carriage through the jungles would
     necessitate a pioneer force a hundred strong to clear the
     impediments and obstacles on the road.

     [Illustration: TARYA TOPAN.]

     "I found an English carpenter named Ferris, to whom I showed the
     boat and explained that the narrowness of the path would make her
     portage absolutely impossible, for since the path was often only
     eighteen inches wide in Africa, and hemmed in on each side with
     dense jungle, any package six feet broad could by no means be
     conveyed along it. It was therefore necessary that each of the four
     sections should be subdivided, by which means I should obtain eight
     portable sections, each three feet wide. Mr. Ferris, perfectly
     comprehending his instructions, and with the aid given by the young
     Pococks, furnished me within two weeks with the newly modelled
     _Lady Alice_. Meantime I was busy purchasing cloth, beads, wire,
     and other African goods, the most of them coming from the
     establishment of Tarya Topan, one of the millionaire merchants of
     Zanzibar. I made Tarya's acquaintance in 1871, and the righteous
     manner in which he then dealt by me caused me now to proceed to him
     again for the same purpose as formerly.

     "The total weight of goods, cloth, beads, wire, stores, medicine,
     bedding, clothes, tents, ammunition, boat, oars, rudders and
     thwarts, instruments and stationery, photographic apparatus, dry
     plates, and miscellaneous articles too numerous to mention, weighed
     a little over eighteen thousand pounds, or rather more than eight
     tons, divided as nearly as possible into loads weighing sixty
     pounds each, and requiring therefore the carrying capacity of
     three hundred men. The loads were made more than usually light, in
     order that we might travel with celerity, and not fatigue the
     people.

     "But still further to provide against sickness and weakness, a
     supernumerary force of forty men were recruited at Bagamoyo,
     Konduchi, and the Rufiji delta, who were required to assemble in
     the neighborhood of the first-mentioned place. Two hundred and
     thirty men, consisting of Wangwana, Wanyamwezi, and coast people
     from Mombasa, Tanga, and Saadani, affixed their marks opposite
     their names before the American consul, for wages varying from two
     to ten dollars per month and rations, according to their capacity,
     strength, and intelligence, with the understanding that they were
     to serve for two years, or until such time as their services should
     be no longer required in Africa, and were to perform their duties
     cheerfully and promptly.

     "On the day of 'signing' the contract each adult received an
     advance of twenty dollars, or four months' pay, and each youth ten
     dollars, or four months' pay. Ration money was also paid them from
     the time of first enlistment, at the rate of one dollar per week,
     up to the day we left the coast. The entire amount disbursed in
     cash for advances of pay and rations at Zanzibar and Bagamoyo was
     $6260, or nearly thirteen hundred pounds.

     "The obligations, however, were not all on one side. Besides the
     due payment to them of their wages, I was compelled to bind myself
     to them, on the word of an 'honorable white man,' to observe the
     following conditions as to conduct towards them:

     "1st. That I should treat them kindly, and be patient with them.

     "2d. That in cases of sickness, I should dose them with proper
     medicine, and see them nourished with the best the country
     afforded. That if patients were unable to proceed, they should be
     conveyed to such places as should be considered safe for their
     persons and their freedom, and convenient for their return, on
     convalescence, to their friends. That, with all patients thus left
     behind, I should leave sufficient cloth or beads to pay the native
     practitioner for his professional attendance, and for the support
     of the patient.

     "3d. That in cases of disagreement between man and man, I should
     judge justly, honestly, and impartially. That I should do my utmost
     to prevent the ill-treatment of the weak by the strong, and never
     permit the oppression of those unable to resist.

     [Illustration: UNIVERSITIES MISSION AT MBWENNI, ZANZIBAR.]

     "That I should act like a 'father and mother' to them, and to the
     best of my ability resist all violence offered to them by 'savage
     natives, and roving and lawless banditti.'

     "They also promised, upon the above conditions being fulfilled,
     that they would do their duty like men, would honor and respect my
     instructions, giving me their united support, and endeavoring to
     the best of their ability to be faithful servants, and would never
     desert me in the hour of need. In short, that they would behave
     like good and loyal children, and 'may the blessing of God,' said
     they 'be upon us.'

     "How we kept this bond of mutual trust and forbearance will be best
     seen in the following chapters, which record the strange and
     eventful story of our journeys.

     "The fleet of six Arab vessels which were to bear us away to the
     west across the Zanzibar Sea were at last brought to anchor a few
     yards from the wharf of the American Consulate. The Wangwana, true
     to their promise that they would be ready, appeared with their
     bundles and mats, and proceeded to take their places in the vessels
     waiting for them. As fast as each dhow was reported to be filled,
     the _nakhuda_, or captain, was directed to anchor farther off shore
     to await the signal to sail. By 5 P.M., of the 12th of November,
     224 men had responded to their names, and five of the Arab vessels,
     laden with the _personnel_, cattle, and _matÃ©riel_ of the
     expedition, were impatiently waiting, with anchor heaved short, the
     word of command. One vessel still lay close ashore, to convey
     myself, and Frederick Barker--in charge of the personal
     servants--our baggage, and dogs. Turning round to my constant and
     well-tried friend, Mr. Augustus Sparhawk, I fervently clasped his
     hand, and with a full heart, though halting tongue, attempted to
     pour out my feelings of gratitude for his kindness and
     long-sustained hospitality, my keen regret at parting, and hopes of
     meeting again. But I was too agitated to be eloquent, and all my
     forced gayety could not carry me through the ordeal. So we parted
     in almost total silence, but I felt assured that he would judge my
     emotions by his own feelings.

     [Illustration: HAREM IN THE HOUSE OF THE SECRETARY OF THE SULTAN OF
     ZANZIBAR.]

     "A wave of my hand, and the anchors were hove up and laid within
     ship, and then, hoisting our lateen sails, we bore away westward to
     launch ourselves into the arms of Fortune. Many wavings of
     kerchiefs and hats, parting signals from white hands, and last long
     looks at friendly white faces, final confused impressions of the
     grouped figures of our well-wishers, and then the evening breeze
     had swept us away into mid-sea, beyond reach of recognition.

     [Illustration: "TOWARDS THE DARK CONTINENT."]

     "The parting is over! We have said our last words for years,
     perhaps forever, to kindly men! The sun sinks fast to the western
     horizon, and gloomy is the twilight that now deepens and darkens.
     Thick shadows fall upon the distant land and over the silent sea,
     and oppress our throbbing, regretful hearts, as we glide away
     through the dying light towards the Dark Continent.

     "Upon landing at Bagamoyo, on the morning of the 13th of November,
     we marched to occupy the old house where we had stayed so long to
     prepare the first expedition. The goods were stored, the dogs
     chained up, the riding asses tethered, the rifles arrayed in the
     store-room, and the sectional boat laid under a roof close by, on
     rollers, to prevent injury from the white ants--a precaution which,
     I need hardly say, we had to observe throughout our journey. Then
     some more ration money, sufficient for ten days, had to be
     distributed among the men, the young Pococks were told off to
     various camp duties, to initiate them to exploring life in Africa,
     and then, after the first confusion of arrival had subsided, I
     began to muster the new _engagÃ©s_.

     "There is an institution at Bagamoyo which ought not to be passed
     over without remark, but the subject cannot be properly dealt with
     until I have described the similar institution, of equal
     importance, at Zanzibar: viz., the Universities Mission. Besides, I
     have three pupils of the Universities Mission who are about to
     accompany me into Africa--Robert Feruzi, Andrew, and Dallington.
     Robert is a stout lad of eighteen years old, formerly a servant to
     one of the members of Lieutenant Cameron's expedition. Andrew is a
     strong youth of nineteen years, rather reserved, and, I should say,
     not of a very bright disposition. Dallington is much younger,
     probably only fifteen, with a face strongly pitted with traces of a
     violent attack of small-pox, but as bright and intelligent as any
     boy of his age, white or black.

     "The Universities Mission is the result of the sensation caused in
     England by Livingstone's discoveries on the Zambezi and of Lakes
     Nyassa and Shirwa. It was despatched by the universities of Oxford
     and Cambridge in the year 1860, and consisted of Bishop Mackenzie,
     formerly Archdeacon of Natal, and the Rev. Messrs. Proctor,
     Scudamore, Burrup, and Rowley. It was established at first in the
     Zambesi country, but was moved, a few years later, to Zanzibar.
     Several of the reverend gentlemen connected with it have died at
     their post of duty, Bishop Mackenzie being the first to fall, but
     the work goes on. The mission at Bagamoyo is in charge of four
     French priests, eight brothers, and twelve sisters, with ten lay
     brothers employed in teaching agriculture. The French fathers
     superintend the tuition of two hundred and fifty children, and give
     employment to about eighty adults. One hundred and seventy freed
     slaves were furnished from the slave captures made by British
     cruisers. They are taught to earn their own living as soon as they
     arrive of age, and are furnished with comfortable lodgings,
     clothing, and household utensils.

     [Illustration: SCENE IN BAGAMOYO.]

     "'Notre Dame de Bagamoyo' is situated about a mile and a half north
     of Bagamoyo, overlooking the sea, which washes the shores just at
     the base of the tolerably high ground on which the mission
     buildings stand. Thrift, order, and that peculiar style of neatness
     common to the French are its characteristics. The cocoa-nut palm,
     orange, and mango flourish in this pious settlement, while a
     variety of garden vegetables and grain are cultivated in the
     fields; and broad roads, cleanly kept, traverse the estate. During
     the superior's late visit to France he obtained a considerable sum
     for the support of the mission, and he has lately established a
     branch mission at Kidudwe. It is evident that, if supported
     constantly by his friends in France, the superior will extend his
     work still farther into the interior, and it is therefore safe to
     predict that the road to Ujiji will in time possess a chain of
     mission stations affording the future European trader and traveller
     safe retreats with the conveniences of civilized life.[2]

     [2] Mr. Stanley's words were prophetic. Since the above was written
     a mission has been established at Ujiji and several other missions
     at points along the road between Lake Tanganika and Bagamoyo.

     "There are two other missions on the east coast of Africa: that of
     the Church Missionary Society, and the Methodist Free Church at
     Mombasa. The former has occupied this station for over thirty
     years, and has a branch establishment at Rabbai Mpia, the home of
     the Dutch missionaries, Krapf, Rebmann, and Erhardt. But these
     missions have not obtained the success which such long
     self-abnegation and devotion to the pious service deserved.

     "On the morning of the 17th of November, 1874, the first bold step
     for the interior was taken. The bugle mustered the people to rank
     themselves before our quarters, and each man's load was given to
     him according as we judged his power of bearing burden. To the man
     of strong, sturdy make, with a large development of muscle, the
     cloth bale of sixty pounds was given, which would in a couple of
     months, by constant expenditure, be reduced to fifty pounds, in six
     months perhaps to forty pounds, and in a year to about thirty
     pounds, provided that all his comrades were faithful to their
     duties; to the short, compactly-formed man, the bead-sack, of fifty
     pounds' weight; to the light youth of eighteen or twenty years old,
     the box of forty pounds, containing stores, ammunition, and
     sundries. To the steady, respectable, grave-looking men of advanced
     years, the scientific instruments, thermometers, barometers,
     watches, sextant, mercury-bottles, compasses, pedometers,
     photographic apparatus, dry plates, stationery, and scientific
     books, all packed in forty-pound cases, were distributed; while the
     man most highly recommended for steadiness and cautious tread was
     intrusted with the carriage of the three chronometers, which were
     stowed in balls of cotton, in a light case weighing not more than
     twenty-five pounds. The twelve Kirangozis, or guides, tricked out
     this day in flowing robes of crimson blanket-cloth, demanded the
     privilege of conveying the several loads of brass-wire coils; and
     as they form the second advanced guard, and are active, bold
     youths--some of whom are to be hereafter known as the boat's crew,
     and to be distinguished by me above all others except the
     chiefs--they are armed with Snider rifles, with their respective
     accoutrements. The boat-carriers are herculean in figure and
     strength, for they are practised bearers of loads, having resigned
     their ignoble profession of hamal in Zanzibar to carry sections of
     the first Europe-made boat that ever floated on Lakes Victoria and
     Tanganika and the extreme sources of the Nile and the Livingstone.
     To each section of the boat there are four men, to relieve one
     another in couples. They get higher pay than even the chiefs,
     except the chief captain, Manwa Sera, and, besides receiving double
     rations, have the privilege of taking their wives along with them.
     There are six riding asses also in the expedition, all saddled, one
     for each of the Europeans--the two Pococks, Barker, and myself--and
     two for the sick; for the latter there are also three of Seydel's
     net hammocks, with six men to act as a kind of ambulance party.

     [Illustration: WIFE OF MANWA SERA.

     (_From a Photograph._)]

     "At nine A.M. we file out of Bagamoyo in the following order: Four
     chiefs a few hundred yards in front; next the twelve guides, clad
     in red robes of Jobo, bearing the wire coils; then a long file of
     two hundred and seventy strong, bearing cloth, wire, beads, and
     sections of the _Lady Alice_; after them thirty-six women and ten
     boys, children of some of the chiefs and boat-bearers, following
     their mothers and assisting them with trifling loads of utensils,
     followed by the riding asses, Europeans, and gun-bearers; the long
     line closed by sixteen chiefs who act as rear-guard, and whose
     duties are to pick up stragglers, and act as supernumeraries until
     other men can be procured; in all, three hundred and fifty-six
     souls connected with the Anglo-American expedition. The lengthy
     line occupies nearly half a mile of the path which, at the present
     day, is the commercial and exploring highway into the lake regions.

     "Edward Pocock acts as bugler, and he has familiarized Hamadi, the
     chief guide, with its notes, so that, in case of a halt being
     required, Hamadi may be informed immediately. The chief guide is
     also armed with a prodigiously long horn of ivory, his favorite
     instrument, and one that belongs to his profession, which he has
     permission to use only when approaching a suitable camping-place,
     or to notify to us danger in the front. Before Hamadi strides a
     chubby little boy with a native drum, which he is to beat only when
     in the neighborhood of villages, to warn them of the advance of a
     caravan, a caution most requisite, for many villages are situated
     in the midst of a dense jungle, and the sudden arrival of a large
     force of strangers before they had time to hide their little
     belongings might awaken jealousy and distrust.

     "In this manner we begin our long journey, full of hopes. There is
     noise and laughter along the ranks, and a hum of gay voices
     murmuring through the fields, as we rise and descend with the waves
     of the land and wind with the sinuosities of the path. Motion had
     restored us all to a sense of satisfaction. We had an intensely
     bright and fervid sun shining above us, the path was dry, hard, and
     admirably fit for travel, and during the commencement of our first
     march nothing could be conceived in better order than the lengthy,
     thin column about to confront the wilderness.

     [Illustration: A LEADING CITIZEN OF BAGAMOYO.]

     "Presently, however, the fervor of the dazzling sun grows
     overpowering as we descend into the valley of the Kingani River.
     The ranks become broken and disordered; stragglers are many; the
     men complain of the terrible heat; the dogs pant in agony. Even we
     ourselves, under our solah topees, with flushed faces and
     perspiring brows, with handkerchiefs ever in use to wipe away the
     drops which almost blind us, and our heavy woollens giving us a
     feeling of semi-asphyxiation, would fain rest, were it not that the
     sun-bleached levels of the tawny, thirsty valley offer no
     inducements. The veterans of travel push on towards the river,
     three miles distant, where they may obtain rest and shelter, but
     the inexperienced are lying prostrate on the ground, exclaiming
     against the heat, and crying for water, bewailing their folly in
     leaving Zanzibar. We stop to tell them to rest awhile, and then to
     come on to the river, where they will find us; we advise,
     encourage, and console the irritated people as best we can, and
     tell them that it is only the commencement of a journey that is so
     hard; that all this pain and weariness are always felt by
     beginners, but that by and by it is shaken off, and that those who
     are steadfast emerge out of the struggle heroes.

     "Frank and his brother Edward, despatched to the ferry at the
     beginning of these delays, have now got the sectional boat _Lady
     Alice_ all ready, and the ferrying of men, goods, asses, and dogs
     across the Kingani is prosecuted with vigor, and at 3.30 P.M. the
     boat is again in pieces, slung on the bearing-poles, and the
     expedition has resumed its journey to Kikoka, the first
     halting-place.

     "But before we reach camp we have acquired a fair idea as to how
     many of our people are stanch and capable, and how many are too
     feeble to endure the fatigues of bearing loads. The magnificent
     prize mastiff dog Castor died of heat apoplexy within two miles of
     Kikoka, and the other mastiff, Captain, seems likely to follow
     soon, and only Nero, Bull, and Jack, though prostrate and breathing
     hard, show any signs of life.

     "At Kikoka, then, we rest the next day. We discharge two men, who
     have been taken seriously ill, and several new recruits, who arrive
     at camp during the night preceding and this day, are engaged.

     "As there are so many subjects to be touched upon along the seven
     thousand miles of explored lines, I propose to be brief with the
     incidents and descriptive sketches of our route to Ituru, because
     the country for two thirds of the way has been sufficiently
     described in 'How I Found Livingstone' and elsewhere.

     [Illustration: THE EXPEDITION AT ROSAKO.]

     "At Rosako the route began to diverge from that which led to Msuwa
     and Simba-Mwenni, and opened out on a stretch of beautiful park
     land, green as an English lawn, dipping into lovely vales, and
     rising into gentle ridges. Thin, shallow threads of water, in
     furrow-like beds or in deep, narrow ditches, which expose the
     sandstone strata on which the fat, ochreous soil rests, run in mazy
     curves round forest clumps or through jungle tangles, and wind
     about among the higher elevations, on their way towards the Wami
     River. We followed this river for some distance, crossing it
     several times at fords where the water was about two and a half
     feet deep. At one of the fords there was a curious
     suspension-bridge over the river, constructed of llianes, with
     great ingenuity, by the natives. The banks were at this point
     sixteen feet high above the river, and from bank to bank the
     distance was only thirty yards; it was evident, therefore, that the
     river must be a dangerous torrent during the rainy season.

     "On the 3d of December we came to the Mkundi River, a tributary of
     the Wami, which divides Nguru country from Usagara.
     Simba-Mwenni--the Lion Lord--owns five villages in this
     neighborhood. He was generous, and gratified us with a gift of a
     sheep, some flour, and plantains, accepting with pleasure some
     cloth in return.

     "The Wa-Nguru are fond of black and white beads and brass wire.
     They split the lobes of their ears, and introduce such curious
     things as the necks of gourds or round disks of wood to extend the
     gash. A medley of strange things are worn round the neck, such as
     tiny goats' horns, small brass chains, and large, egglike beads.
     Blue Kaniki and the red-barred Barsati are the favorite cloths in
     this region. The natives dye their faces with ochre, and, probably
     influenced by the example of the Wanyamwezi, dress their hair in
     long ringlets, which are adorned with pendicles of copper, or white
     or red beads of the large Sam-sam pattern.

     "Grand and impressive scenery meets the eye as we march to
     Makubika, where we attain an altitude of two thousand six hundred
     and seventy-five feet above the ocean. Peaks and knolls rise in all
     directions, for we are now ascending to the eastern front of the
     Kaguru Mountains. The summits of Ukamba are seen to the north, its
     slopes famous for the multitude of elephants. Farther inland we
     reached the spine of a hill at four thousand four hundred and
     ninety feet, and beheld an extensive plain, stretching northwest
     and west, with browsing herds of noble game. Camping on its verge,
     between a humpy hill and some rocky knolls, near a beautiful pond
     of crystal-clear water, I proceeded with my gun-bearer, Billali,
     and the notorious Msenna, in the hope of bringing down something
     for the Wangwana.

     "The plain was broader than I had judged it by the eye from the
     crest of the hill whence we had first sighted it. It was not until
     we had walked briskly over a long stretch of tawny grass, crushed
     by sheer force through a brambly jungle, and trampled down a path
     through clumps of slender cane-stalks, that we came at last in view
     of a small herd of zebras. These animals are so quick of scent and
     ear, and so vigilant with their eyes, that, across an open space,
     it is most difficult to stalk them. But, by dint of tremendous
     exertion, I contrived to approach within two hundred and fifty
     yards, taking advantage of every thin tussock of grass, and, almost
     at random, fired. One of the herd leaped from the ground, galloped
     a few short, maddened strides, and then, on a sudden, staggered,
     kneeled, trembled, and fell over, its legs kicking the air. Its
     companions whinnied shrilly for their mate, and presently, wheeling
     in circles with graceful motion, advanced nearer, still whinnying,
     until I dropped another, with a crushing ball through the
     head--much against my wish, for I think zebras were created for
     better purpose than to be eaten. The remnant of the herd vanished.

     [Illustration: VIEW FROM THE VILLAGE OF MAMBOYA.]

     "Billali, requested to run to camp to procure Wangwana to carry the
     meat, was only too happy, knowing what brave cheers and hearty
     congratulations would greet him. Msenna was already busy skinning
     one of the animals, some three hundred yards from me, when, turning
     my head, I made out the form of some tawny animal, that was
     advancing with a curious long step, and I recognized it to be a
     lion. I motioned to Msenna, who happened to be looking up, and
     beckoned him. 'What do you think it is, Msenna?' I asked. 'Simba [a
     lion], master,' he answered.

     "The animal approached slowly, while I made ready to receive him
     with an explosive bullet from the elephant rifle. When within three
     hundred yards he paused, and then turned and trotted off into a bit
     of scrubby jungle, about eight hundred yards away. Ten minutes
     elapsed, and then as many animals emerged from the same spot into
     which the other had disappeared, and approached us in stately
     column. But it being now dusk I could not discern them very
     clearly. We both were, however, quite sure in our own minds that
     they were lions, or at any rate some animals so like them in the
     twilight that we could not imagine them to be anything else. When
     the foremost had come within one hundred yards I fired. It sprang
     up and fell, and the others disappeared with a dreadful rush. We
     now heard shouts behind us, for the Wangwana had come; so, taking
     one or two with me, I endeavored to discover what I felt sure to be
     a prostrate lion, but it could not be found.

     "The next day Manwa Sera went out to hunt for the lion-skin, but
     returned after a long search with only a strong doubt in his mind
     as to its having been a lion, and a few reddish hairs to prove
     that it was something which had been eaten by hyenas. This day I
     succeeded in shooting a small antelope of the springbok kind.

     "On the 12th of December, twenty-five days' march from Bagamoyo, we
     arrived at Mpwapwa.

     [Illustration: OUR CAMP AT MPWAPWA.

     (_From a Photograph._)]

     "Mpwapwa has also some fine trees, but no forest; the largest being
     the tamarind, sycamore, cottonwood, and baobab. The collection of
     villages denominated by this title lies widely scattered on either
     side of the Mpwapwa stream, at the base of the southern slope of a
     range of mountains that extends in a sinuous line from Chunyu to
     Ugombo. I call it a range, because it appeared to be one from
     Mpwapwa; but in reality it is simply the northern flank of a deep
     indentation in the great mountain chain that extends from
     Abyssinia, or even Suez, down to the Cape of Good Hope. At the
     extreme eastern point of this indentation from the western side
     lies Lake Ugombo, just twenty-four miles from Mpwapwa.

     "Desertions from the expedition had been frequent. At first,
     KachÃ©chÃ©, the chief detective, and his gang of four men, who had
     received their instructions to follow us a day's journey behind,
     enabled me to recapture sixteen of the deserters; but the cunning
     Wangwana and Wanyamwezi soon discovered this resource of mine
     against their well-known freaks, and, instead of striking east in
     their departure, absconded either south or north of the track. We
     then had detectives posted long before dawn, several hundred yards
     away from the camp, who were bidden to lie in wait in the bush
     until the expedition had started, and in this manner we succeeded
     in repressing to some extent the disposition to desert, and
     arrested very many men on the point of escaping; but even this was
     not adequate. Fifty had abandoned us before reaching Mpwapwa,
     taking with them the advances they had received, and often their
     guns, on which our safety might depend.

     [Illustration: DETECTIVE AND ASSISTANTS.]

     "Several feeble men and women also had to be left behind, and it
     was evident that the very wariest methods failed to bind the people
     to their duties. The best of treatment and abundance of provisions
     daily distributed were alike insufficient to induce such faithless
     natures to be loyal. However, we persisted, and as often as we
     failed in one way we tried another. Had all these men remained
     loyal to their contract and promises, we should have been too
     strong for any force to attack us, as our numbers must necessarily
     have commanded respect in lands and among tribes where only power
     is respected.

     "One day's march from Mpwapwa brought us to Chunyu--an exposed and
     weak settlement, overlooking the desert or wilderness separating
     Usagara from Ugogo. Close to our right towered the Usagara
     Mountains, and on our left stretched the inhospitable arm of the
     wilderness. Fifteen or twenty miles distant to the south rose the
     vast cluster of Rubeho's cones and peaks.

     "The water at Chunyu is nitrous and bitter to the taste. The
     natives were once prosperous, but repeated attacks from the WahehÃ©
     to the south and the Wahumba to the north have reduced them in
     numbers, and compelled them to seek refuge on the hill-summits.

     "On the 16th of December, at early dawn, we struck camp, and at an
     energetic pace descended into the wilderness, and at 7 P.M. the
     vanguard of the expedition entered Ugogo, camping two or three
     miles from the frontier village of Kikombo. The next day, at a
     more moderate pace, we entered the populated district, and took
     shelter under a mighty baobab a few hundred yards distant from the
     chief's village."

Here Frank announced that it was late in the afternoon, and he wished to
take a promenade on deck. With the permission of his auditors he would
postpone the narrative until evening. The proposal was accepted, but
before the youth could retire he was warmly thanked by those whom he had
so agreeably entertained.

[Illustration: AN AFRICAN BELLE.]




CHAPTER III.

RETARDED BY RAINS AND OTHER MISHAPS.--GENERAL DESPONDENCY.--DEATH OF
EDWARD POCOCK.--A CHANGE FOR THE BETTER.--A LAND OF PLENTY.--ARRIVAL AT
VICTORIA LAKE.--NATIVE SONG.--AFLOAT ON THE GREAT LAKE.--TERRIBLE TALES
OF THE INHABITANTS.--ENCOUNTERS WITH THE NATIVES.--THE VICTORIA
NILE.--RIPON FALLS.--SPEKE'S EXPLORATIONS.--THE ALEXANDRA NILE.--ARRIVAL
AT KING MTESA'S COURT.--A MAGNIFICENT RECEPTION.--IN THE MONARCH'S
PRESENCE.--STANLEY'S FIRST OPINIONS OF MTESA.


When the audience assembled in the evening Frank turned rapidly several
pages of the book and said that Mr. Stanley's expedition was greatly
retarded by the heavy rains which fell frequently and converted the
ground into a water-soaked marsh, through which it was very difficult to
proceed. Christmas day was a day of gloom, as everybody was wet and cold
and hungry; the natives had little grain to sell, and the expedition was
reduced to half-rations of food.

[Illustration: AN AFRICAN BLACKSMITH'S-SHOP.]

Mr. Stanley wrote in his diary that he weighed one hundred and eighty
pounds when he left Zanzibar, but his sufferings and lack of nourishing
food had brought him down to one hundred and thirty-four pounds in
thirty-eight days; and the young Englishmen that accompanied him were
similarly reduced. In every new territory they entered they were
obliged to pay tribute to the ruler, according to the custom of Africa,
and the settlement of the question of tribute required a great deal of
bargaining. There were frequent desertions of men, and in many instances
they had not the honesty to leave behind them their loads and guns. At
one place it was discovered that fifty men had formed a conspiracy to
desert in a body, but the scheme was stopped by arresting the
ringleaders and disarming their followers.

"Some twenty or more men were on the sick-list and too ill to walk,"
said Frank, "several were carried in hammocks, and others were left at
the native villages, in accordance with the arrangements made at
Zanzibar. The expedition halted four days at Suna, in the Warimi
country, where grain was purchased at a high price, and the people
seemed inclined to make trouble. The leader of the expedition was
obliged to use a great deal of tact to conciliate the chiefs of this
people, who are numerous and well-armed, so that an attack would have
been no easy matter to resist. Edward Pocock was taken seriously ill at
Suna, and carried in a hammock to Chiwyu--four hundred miles from the
coast, and at an elevation of five thousand four hundred feet above the
sea. In spite of all the attentions he received, he died soon after
their arrival at the latter place. I will read Stanley's account of the
burial of his faithful companion and friend:

[Illustration: FUNERAL OF EDWARD POCOCK: VIEW OF OUR CAMP.]

     "We excavated a grave, four feet deep, at the foot of a hoary
     acacia with wide-spreading branches; and on its ancient trunk Frank
     engraved a deep cross, the emblem of the faith we all believe in;
     and, when folded in its shroud, we laid the body in its final
     resting-place, during the last gleams of sunset. We read the
     beautiful prayers of the church-service for the dead, and, out of
     respect for the departed--whose frank, sociable, and winning
     manners had won their friendship and regard--nearly all the
     Wangwana were present, to pay a last tribute of sighs to poor
     Edward Pocock.

     "When the last solemn prayer had been read, we retired to our
     tents, to brood, in sorrow and silence, over our irreparable loss."

[Illustration]

"By the 21st of January," said Frank, "eighty-nine men had deserted,
twenty had died, and there were many sick or disabled. Mr. Stanley would
have been justified in fearing that he would be obliged to abandon his
expedition and retreat to the coast. The loads were reduced as much as
possible, every article that could in any way be spared being thrown out
and destroyed. On the 24th the natives attacked the camp, but were
driven back; and another battle followed on the 25th, with the same
result. On the 26th the march was resumed, and the hostile region was
left behind. New men were engaged at some of the villages, the weather
improved, provisions were abundant, and in the early days of February
the halting-places of the expedition presented a marked contrast to
those of a month earlier.

[Illustration: AN AFRICAN LAMB.]

"The country in which they were now travelling," Frank continued, "was a
fertile region, with broad pastures, and occasional stretches of
forest--a land of plenty and promise. The natives had an abundance of
cattle, sheep, goats, and chickens, which they sold at low prices; they
were entirely friendly to the travellers, and whenever the expedition
moved away from its camps, it was urged to come again. Mr. Stanley gives
the following list of prices, which he paid in this land of abundance:

  "1 ox              6 yards of sheeting.
  1 goat             2 yards of sheeting.
  1 sheep            2 yards of sheeting.
  1 chicken          1 necklace.
  6 chickens         2 yards of sheeting."

"On the 26th of February it was reported that another day's march would
bring them to the shore of the Great Nyanza, the Victoria Lake. I will
now read you what Mr. Stanley says about this march, and his first view
of the lake.

     "On the morning of the 27th of February we rose up early, and
     braced ourselves for the long march of nineteen miles, which
     terminated at 4 P.M. at the village of Kagehyi.

     "The people were as keenly alive to the importance of this day's
     march, and as fully sensitive to what this final journey to Kagehyi
     promised their wearied frames, as we Europeans. They, as well as
     ourselves, looked forward to many weeks of rest from our labors and
     to an abundance of good food.

     "When the bugle sounded the signal to 'Take the road,' the
     Wanyamwezi and Wangwana responded to it with cheers, and loud cries
     of 'Ay indeed, ay indeed, please God;' and their good-will was
     contagious. The natives, who had mustered strongly to witness our
     departure, were affected by it, and stimulated our people by
     declaring that the lake was not very far off--'but two or three
     hours' walk.'

     "We dipped into the basins and troughs of the land, surmounted
     ridge after ridge, crossed water-courses and ravines, passed by
     cultivated fields, and through villages smelling strongly of
     cattle, by good-natured groups of natives, until, ascending a long,
     gradual slope, we heard, on a sudden, hurrahing in front, and then
     we too, with the lagging rear, knew that those in the van were in
     view of the Great Lake! the lake which Speke discovered in 1858.

     [Illustration: UNYAMWEZI PORTER.]

     "Frank Pocock impetuously strode forward until he gained the brow
     of the hill. He took a long, sweeping look at something, waved his
     hat, and came down towards us, his face beaming with joy, as he
     shouted out enthusiastically, with the fervor of youth and high
     spirits, 'I have seen the lake, sir, and it is grand!' Frederick
     Barker, riding painfully on an ass, and sighing wearily from
     illness and the length of the journey, lifted his head to smile his
     thanks to his comrade.

     "Presently we also reached the brow of the hill, where we found the
     expedition halted, and the first quick view revealed to us a long,
     broad arm of water, which a dazzling sun transformed into silver,
     some six hundred feet below us, at the distance of three miles.

     "A more careful and detailed view of the scene showed us that the
     hill on which we stood sloped gradually to the broad bay or gulf
     edged by a line of green, wavy reeds and thin groves of umbrageous
     trees scattered along the shore, on which stood several small
     villages of conical huts. Beyond these, the lake stretched like a
     silvery plain far to the eastward, and away across to a boundary of
     dark-blue hills and mountains, while several gray, rocky islets
     mocked us at first with an illusion of Arab dhows with white sails.
     The Wanyamwezi struck up the song of triumph:

  "'Sing, O friends, sing; the journey is ended:
  Sing aloud, O friends, sing to the great Nyanza.
  Sing all, sing loud, O friends, sing to the great sea;
  Give your last look to the lands behind and then turn to the sea.

  "'Long time ago you left your lands,
  Your wives and children, your brothers and your friends:
  Tell me, have you seen a sea like this
  Since you left the great salt sea?

     "CHORUS.

  "'Then sing, O friends, sing; the journey is ended:
  Sing aloud, O friends: sing to this great sea.
  This sea is fresh, is good, and sweet;
  Your sea is salt, and bad, unfit to drink.
  This sea is like wine to drink for thirsty men;
  The salt sea--bah! it makes men sick.'

     "I have in the above (as literal a translation as I can render it)
     made no attempt at rhyme--nor, indeed, did the young, handsome, and
     stalwart Corypheus who delivered the harmonious strains with such
     startling effect. The song, though extemporized, was eminently
     dramatic, and when the chorus joined in it made the hills ring with
     a wild and strange harmony. Reanimated by the cheerful music, we
     flung the flags to the breeze, and filed slowly down the slopes
     towards the fields of Kagehyi.

     "About half a mile from the villages we were surprised by seeing
     hundreds of warriors decked with feathered head-dresses and armed
     to the teeth, advancing on the run towards us, and exhibiting, as
     they came, their dexterity with bows and arrows and spears. They
     had at first been alarmed at the long procession filing down the
     hill, supposing we were bent on hostilities, but, though
     discovering their error, they still thought it too good an
     opportunity to be lost for showing their bravery, and therefore
     amused us with this by-play. Sungoro Tarib, an Arab resident at
     Kagehyi, also despatched a messenger with words of welcome, and an
     invitation to us to make Kagehyi our camp, as Prince Kaduma, chief
     of Kagehyi, was his faithful ally.

     [Illustration: VIEW OF KAGEHYI FROM THE EDGE OF THE LAKE.

     (_From a Photograph._)]

     "In a short time we had entered the wretched-looking village, and
     Kaduma was easily induced by Sungoro to proffer hospitalities to
     the strangers. A small conical hut, about twenty feet in diameter,
     badly lighted, and with a strong smell of animal matter--its roof
     swarmed with bold rats, which, with a malicious persistence, kept
     popping in and out of their nests in the straw roof, and rushing
     over the walls--was placed at my disposal as a store-room. Another
     small hut was presented to Frank Pocock and Fred Barker as their
     quarters.

     "In summing up, during the evening of our arrival at this rude
     village on the Nyanza, the number of statute miles travelled by us,
     as measured by two rated pedometers and pocket watch, I ascertained
     it to be seven hundred and twenty. The time occupied--from November
     17, 1874, to February 27, 1875, inclusive--was one hundred and
     three days, divided into seventy marching and thirty-three halting
     days, by which it will be perceived that our marches averaged a
     little over ten miles per day. But as halts are imperative, the
     more correct method of ascertaining the rate of travel would be to
     include the time occupied by halts and marches, and divide the
     total distance by the number of days occupied. This reduces the
     rate to seven miles per diem.

     "We all woke on the morning of the 28th of February with a feeling
     of intense relief. There were no more marches, no more bugle-calls
     to rouse us up for another fatiguing day, no more fear of
     hunger--at least for a season.

     "At 9 A.M. a _burzah_, or levee, was held. First came Frank and
     Fred--now quite recovered from fever--to bid me good-morning, and
     to congratulate themselves and me upon the prospective rest before
     us. Next came the Wangwana and Wanyamwezi chiefs, to express a hope
     that I had slept well, and after them the bold youths of the
     expedition; then came Prince Kaduma and Sungoro, to whom we were
     bound this day to render an account of the journey and to give the
     latest news from Zanzibar; and, lastly, the princess and her
     principal friends--for introductions have to be undergone in this
     land as in others. The _burzah_ lasted two hours, after which my
     visitors retired to pursue their respective avocations, which I
     discovered to be principally confined, on the part of the natives,
     to gossiping, making or repairing fishing-nets, hatchets, canoes,
     food-troughs, village fences, and huts, and on the part of our
     people to arranging plans for building their own grass-huts, being
     perfectly content to endure a long stay at Kagehyi.

     [Illustration: FRANK POCOCK.

     (_From a Photograph taken at Kagehyi._)]

     "Though the people had only their own small domestic affairs to
     engage their attentions, and Frank and Fred were for this day
     relieved from duty, I had much to do--observations to take to
     ascertain the position of Kagehyi, and its altitude above the sea;
     to prepare paper, pens, and ink for the morrow's report to the
     journals which had despatched me to this remote and secluded part
     of the globe; to make calculations of the time likely to be
     occupied in a halt at Kagehyi, in preparing and equipping the _Lady
     Alice_ for sea, and in circumnavigating the great 'Nianja,' as the
     Wasukuma call the lake.[3] It was also incumbent upon me to
     ascertain the political condition of the country before leaving
     the port and the camp, that my mind might be at rest about its
     safety during my contemplated absence. Estimates were also to be
     entered upon as to the quantity of cloth and beads likely to be
     required for the provisioning of the expeditionary force during my
     absence, and as to the amount of tribute and presents to be
     bestowed upon the King of Uchambi--of which Kagehyi was only a
     small district, and to whom Prince Kaduma was only a subordinate
     and tributary. In brief, my own personal work was but begun, and
     pages would not suffice to describe in detail the full extent of
     the new duties now devolving upon me.

     [3] Captain Speke spelled it "Nyanza," which means "lake," or
     "great water." Out of regard to the work of the great explorer the
     name has been retained.

     [Illustration: AFRICAN ARMS AND ORNAMENTS.]

     "The village of Kagehyi, in the Uchambi district and country of
     Usukuma, became after our arrival a place of great local
     importance. It attracted an unusual number of native traders from
     all sides within a radius of twenty or thirty miles. Fishermen from
     UkerewÃ©, whose purple hills we saw across the arm of the lake, came
     in their canoes, with stores of dried fish; the people of Igusa,
     Sima, and Magu, east of us in Usukuma, brought their cassava, or
     manioc, and ripe bananas; the herdsmen of Usmau, thirty miles south
     of Kagehyi, sent their oxen; and the tribes of Muanza--famous
     historically as being the point whence Speke first saw this broad
     gulf of Lake Victoria--brought their hoes, iron wire, and salt,
     besides great plenty of sweet potatoes and yams.

     "Within seven days the _Lady Alice_ was ready, and strengthened for
     a rough sea-life. Provisions of flour and dried fish, bales of
     cloth and beads of various kinds, odds and ends of small possible
     necessaries were boxed, and she was declared at last to be only
     waiting for her crew. 'Would any one volunteer to accompany me?' A
     dead silence ensued. 'Not for rewards and extra pay?' Another dead
     silence: no one would volunteer.

     "'Yet I must,' said I, 'depart. Will you let me go alone?'

     "'No.'

     "'What then? Show me my braves--those men who freely enlist to
     follow their master round the sea.'

     "All were again dumb. Appealed to individually, each said he knew
     nothing of sea life; each man frankly declared himself a terrible
     coward on water.

     "'Then what am I to do?'

     "Manwa Sera said:

     "'Master, have done with these questions. Command your party. All
     your people are your children, and they will not disobey you. While
     you ask them as a friend, no one will offer his services. Command
     them, and they will all go.'

     [Illustration: VIEW NEAR VICTORIA LAKE.]

     "So I selected a chief, Wadi Safeni--the son of Safeni--and told
     him to pick out the elect of the young men. Wadi Safeni chose men
     who knew nothing of boat-life. Then I called KachÃ©chÃ©, the
     detective, and told him to ascertain the names of those young men
     who were accustomed to sea-life, upon which KachÃ©chÃ© informed me
     that the young guides first selected by me at Bagamoyo were the
     sailors of the expedition. After reflecting upon the capacities of
     the younger men, as they had developed themselves on the road, I
     made a list of ten sailors and a steersman, to whose fidelity I was
     willing to intrust myself and fortunes while coasting round the
     Victoria sea.

     "Accordingly, after drawing up instructions for Frank Pocock and
     Fred Barker, on about a score of matters concerning the well-being
     of the expedition during my absence, and enlisting for them, by an
     adequate gift, the good-will of Sungoro and Prince Kaduma, I set
     sail on the 8th of March, 1875, eastward along the shores of the
     broad arm of the lake which we first sighted, and which
     henceforward is known, in honor of its first discoverer, as 'Speke
     Gulf.'

     [Illustration: DWELLERS ON THE SHORE OF THE LAKE.]

     "The reluctance of my followers to venture upon Lake Victoria was
     due to what they had heard about it from Prince Kaduma's people.
     'There were,' they said, 'a people dwelling on its shores who were
     gifted with tails; another who trained enormous and fierce dogs for
     war; another a tribe of cannibals, who preferred human flesh to all
     other kinds of meat. The lake was so large it would take years to
     trace its shores, and who then at the end of that time would remain
     alive?' Its opposite shores, from their very vagueness of outline,
     and its people, from the distorting fogs of misrepresentation
     through which we saw them, only heightened the fears of my men as
     to the dangers which filled the prospect."

"Mr. Stanley explored the shores of Speke Gulf," said Frank, after a
short pause, "and then proceeded to follow the eastern shore of the
great lake, which stretched out to the east and north apparently as
limitless as the ocean. On the islands of Speke Gulf he found great
numbers of crocodiles, and at almost every step he took among the reeds,
on the shore of one of the islands, a huge crocodile rushed past him
into the water. Hippopotami were numerous, some of them coming
disagreeably near to his boat, and evidently desiring to make his
acquaintance. The natives around the gulf were not hostile, but caused
despondency in the hearts of Stanley's men by predicting that it would
take him eight years to circumnavigate the lake.

"But on the shores of the lake itself the people showed signs of
hostility, and came to the water's edge with their spears and shields.
On such occasions the party kept away from land and parleyed at a safe
distance. Once a war-canoe carrying some forty men armed with spears and
slings came close alongside the _Lady Alice_; the men in the canoe were
insolent and evidently wanted to fight. Before beginning, however, they
exhibited their skill by throwing stones with their slings, and whenever
they made good shots the strangers applauded and smiled. In fact, they
had been smiling all the time since the canoe came alongside.

"When he considered the time had come to put an end to their insolence,
Mr. Stanley drew his revolver and fired rapidly into the water in the
direction where the last stone had been flung. The effect was ludicrous
in the extreme, as none of the fellows had ever before heard the sound
of a firearm. They sprang into the water and swam away for dear life,
leaving their canoe in the hands of the strangers. They were finally
coaxed back, but were more respectful in their demeanor.

"At another time," said Frank, "the natives came with a large fleet of
canoes and attacked the _Lady Alice_, but were driven off without
serious difficulty. Mr. Stanley's plan was, in fights of this sort, to
use his large rifle with explosive shells, which he aimed just at the
water-line of the canoes. The craft would thus be sunk or disabled,
while the crew, who are all good swimmers, ran no risk of being drowned.
Pursuit would thus be stopped, and the _Lady Alice_ have plenty of time
to escape.

[Illustration: THE "LADY ALICE" AT BRIDGE ISLAND, VICTORIA NYANZA.]

"Without accident, the adventurous party reached the outlet of the lake
and visited Ripon Falls, the head of the Victoria Nile, which flows
into the Albert Nyanza. The latter lake is the source of the White
Nile--the Nile of Egypt, and one of the historic rivers of the world."

[Illustration: VIEW OF THE BAY LEADING TO RUGEDZI CHANNEL FROM KIGOMA,
NEAR KISORYA, SOUTH SIDE OF UKEREWÃ‰, COAST OF SPEKE GULF.

(_From a Photograph by Mr. Stanley._)]

One of the youths asked how the Ripon Falls received that name.

"The name was given by Captain Speke, the first white man who ever saw
the falls," replied Frank. "He may be called their discoverer, as the
visit to the falls was made during his exploration of the Victoria
Nyanza. At the time his expedition was fitted out, the Marquis of Ripon
was the president of the Royal Geographical Society, and hence the name
that Captain Speke gave to the falls."

"I suppose, then, that the Victoria Nyanza, or Victoria Lake, is the
source of the Nile," another of Frank's auditors remarked.

Frank looked inquiringly at Doctor Bronson, who immediately came to the
youth's assistance.

"For all practical purposes," said the Doctor, "Captain Speke's claim
that he had discovered the source of the Nile when he found the stream
which drained the lake, was a just one. But by common consent of
geographers the source of a river is the brook or rivulet, however tiny,
that rises farthest from its mouth. Adopting this as a rule, the source
of the Nile was not the Victoria Lake itself, but its longest affluent,
and this is a question not yet fully determined, though it is fairly
well settled that the honor belongs to the Alexandra Nile, or Kagera
River, which is certainly the longest affluent of the lake. The Kagera
River flows from Alexandra Lake, which lies nearly due west from the
southern end of Victoria Lake; the distance is about one hundred and
fifty miles in a direct line, but much greater according to the African
routes of travel."

"Did Mr. Stanley visit Alexandra Lake and find out what streams flowed
into it?" one of the youths inquired, as Doctor Bronson paused.

"He was unable to do so," was the reply, "and no other traveller has yet
completed the exploration. Some geographers think that the longest
affluent of Lake Victoria will yet prove to be one of the streams coming
in from the eastward, and having its source at the base of Mount
Kilima-Njaro; but until this is shown to be an established fact, we may
assume that the Alexandra Nile is the head of the great river of Egypt,
as it certainly is the largest stream that flows into Victoria Lake."

[Illustration: VIEW OF RIPON FALLS FROM THE UGANDA SIDE.

(_From a Photograph by Mr. Stanley._)]

"Are there any other falls on the Victoria Nile besides the Ripon Falls
just mentioned?" was the next inquiry from the audience.

"There are several falls and rapids on the stream," the Doctor answered,
"the most important being Murchison Falls, not far from where the
Victoria Nile emerges into Albert Lake. Lake Albert is more than a
thousand feet below the level of Lake Victoria, and therefore you may
expect a rapid descent of the river that connects these two bodies of
water.

[Illustration: DRESSED FOR COLD WEATHER.]

"During the time that Egypt had partial control of the lake region of
Central Africa, its government established a military station at
Foueira, on the Victoria Nile, just above the Kuruma Falls. The river
was explored from one end to the other, and it was ascertained that,
though there were several places where for many miles the current was
comparatively placid, there were so many falls and rapids that
navigation was practically impossible. Consequently no use was made of
the stream, and all expeditions through that region travel by land.
Unless an expedition is sufficiently powerful to force its way,
travellers avoid the villages and keep as much as possible in the
wilderness, to escape the extortionate demands of its petty chiefs, who
invariably demand a high tribute. Whatever they see they want, and it
requires a great deal of diplomacy to escape from them without being
stripped of everything of any value.

"But we are wandering from the route where we left Mr. Stanley," said
Doctor Bronson, "and will now turn back to see where he went after
visiting Ripon Falls. Frank will inform us."

Under this hint Frank continued:

"Where the lake narrows at the head of the Victoria Nile, or just above
the falls, there is a V-shaped bay which is called Napoleon Channel. On
the east of this channel is the country of Usoga, and on the west that
of Uganda. The latter is the territory of the famous King Mtesa, or
rather it was his territory at the time of Mr. Stanley's visit, as he
has since died and left the kingdom to his son.

"Mr. Stanley found the people of Uganda friendly; and by one of the
local chiefs he sent a message to the king to announce his coming. Then
he waited at one of the islands until the chief returned with Mtesa's
reply, which was that Stanley should come and see him. Escorted by a
small fleet of war-canoes, commanded by a native named Magassa, he
proceeded on his journey to Usavara, the port of Mtesa's capital, about
ten miles farther inland. I will read Mr. Stanley's account of his
reception.

     "When about two miles from Usavara we saw what we estimated to be
     thousands of people arranging themselves in order on a gently
     rising ground. When about a mile from the shore Magassa gave the
     order to signal our advance upon it with firearms, and was at once
     obeyed by his dozen musketeers. Half a mile off I saw that the
     people on the shore had formed themselves into two dense lines, at
     the ends of which stood several finely-dressed men, arrayed in
     crimson and black and snowy white. As we neared the beach volleys
     of musketry burst out from the long lines. Magassa's canoes steered
     outward to right and left, while two or three hundred
     heavily-loaded guns announced to all around that the white man had
     landed. Numerous kettle and bass drums sounded a noisy welcome, and
     flags, banners, and bannerets waved, and the people gave a great
     shout. Very much amazed at all this ceremonious and pompous
     greeting, I strode up towards the great standard, near which stood
     a short young man, dressed in a crimson robe, which covered an
     immaculately white dress of bleached cotton, before whom Magassa,
     who had hurried ashore, kneeled reverently, and turning to me
     begged me to understand that this short young man was the
     _katekiro_. Not knowing very well who the "katekiro" was, I only
     bowed, which, strange to say, was imitated by him, only that his
     bow was far more profound and stately than mine. I was perplexed,
     confused, embarrassed, and I believe I blushed inwardly at this
     regal reception, though I hope I did not betray any embarrassment.

     [Illustration: THE VICTORIA NILE, NORTH OF RIPON FALLS, RUSHING
     TOWARDS UNYORO, FROM THE USOGO SIDE OF THE FALLS.

     (_From a Photograph by Mr. Stanley._)]

     "A dozen well-dressed people now came forward, and grasping my hand
     declared in the Swahili language that I was welcome to Uganda. The
     _katekiro_ motioned with his head, and amid a perfect concourse of
     beaten drums, which drowned all conversation, we walked side by
     side, and followed by curious thousands, to a courtyard, and a
     circle of grass-thatched huts surrounding a larger house, which I
     was told were my quarters.

     [Illustration: RECEPTION BY KING MTESA'S BODY-GUARD AT USAVARA.]

     "The _katekiro_ and several of the chiefs accompanied me to my new
     hut, and a very sociable conversation took place. There was present
     a native of Zanzibar, named Tori, whom I shortly discovered to be
     chief drummer, engineer, and general jack-of-all-trades for the
     _kabaka_ (king). From this clever, ingenious man I obtained the
     information that the _katekiro_ was the prime-minister or the
     _kabaka_'s deputy, and that the titles of the other chiefs were
     Chambarango, Kangau, Mkwenda, Sekebobo, Kitunzi, Sabaganzi, Kauta,
     Saruti. There were several more present, but I must defer mention
     of them to other chapters.

     "Waganda,[4] as I found subsequently, are not in the habit of
     remaining incurious before a stranger. Hosts of questions were
     fired off at me about my health, my journey and its aim, Zanzibar,
     Europe and its people, the seas and the heavens, sun, moon, and
     stars, angels and devils, doctors, priests, and craftsmen in
     general; in fact, as the representative of nations who 'know
     everything,' I was subjected to a most searching examination, and
     in one hour and ten minutes it was declared unanimously that I
     had 'passed.' Forthwith, after the acclamation, the stately bearing
     became merged into a more friendly one, and long, thin, nervous
     black hands were pushed into mine enthusiastically, from which I
     gathered that they applauded me as though I had won the honors of a
     senior wrangler. Some proceeded direct to the _kabaka_ and informed
     him that the white man was a genius, knew everything, and was
     remarkably polite and sociable, and the _kabaka_ was said to have
     'rubbed his hands as though he had just come into the possession of
     a treasure.'

     [4] Waganda signifies "people of Uganda." The prefix Ki, as in
     Ki-Swahili or Ki-Sagara, denotes language of Swahili or Sagara. The
     prefix U represents country; Wa, a plural, denoting people; M,
     singular, for a person, thus:

     U-Sagara. Country of Sagara.

     Wa-Sagara. People of Sagara.

     M-Sagara. A person of Sagara.

     Ki-Sagara. Language of Sagara, or after the custom, manner, or
     style of Sagara, as English stands in like manner for anything
     relating to England.

     "The fruits of the favorable verdict passed upon myself and merits
     were seen presently in fourteen fat oxen, sixteen goats and sheep,
     a hundred bunches of bananas, three dozen fowls, four wooden jars
     of milk, four baskets of sweet potatoes, fifty cars of green Indian
     corn, a basket of rice, twenty fresh eggs, and ten pots of mararaba
     wine. Kauta, Mtesa's steward or butler, at the head of the drovers
     and bearers of these various provisions, fell on his knees before
     me and said:

     "'The _kabaka_ sends salaams unto his friend who has travelled so
     far to see him. The _kabaka_ cannot see the face of his friend
     until he has eaten and is satisfied. The _kabaka_ has sent his
     slave with these few things to his friend that he may eat, and at
     the ninth hour, after his friend has rested, the _kabaka_ will send
     and call for him to appear at the _burzah_. I have spoken.
     _Twi-yanzi-yanzi-yanzi!_' (thanks, thanks, thanks).

     "I replied suitably, though my politeness was not so excessive as
     to induce me to kneel before the courtly butler and thank him for
     permission to say I thanked him.

     [Illustration: WAITING ORDERS.]

     "The ninth hour of the day approached. We had bathed, brushed,
     cleaned ourselves, and were prepared externally and mentally for
     the memorable hour when we should meet the foremost man of
     equatorial Africa. Two of the _kabaka_'s pages, clad in a costume
     semi-Kingwana and semi-Kiganda, came to summon us--the Kingwana
     part being the long white shirt of Zanzibar, folded with a belt or
     band about the loins, the Kiganda part being the Sohari doti cloth
     depending from the right shoulder to the feet. 'The _kabaka_
     invites you to the _burzah_,' said they. Forthwith we issue from
     our courtyard, five of the boat's crew on each side of me, armed
     with Snider rifles. We reach a short, broad street, at the end of
     which is a hut. Here the _kabaka_ is seated with a multitude of
     chiefs, Wakungu[5] and Watongoleh, ranked from the throne in two
     opposing kneeling or seated lines, the ends being closed in by
     drummers, guards, executioners, pages, etc., etc. As we approached
     the nearest group it opened and the drummers beat mighty sounds,
     Tori's drumming being conspicuous from its sharper beat. The
     foremost man of equatorial Africa rises and advances, and all the
     kneeling and seated lines rise--generals, colonels, chiefs, cooks,
     butlers, pages, executioners, etc., etc.

     [5] Wakungu is the plural of _mkungu_, a rank equivalent to
     "general." Watongoleh is the plural of _mtongoleh_, or "colonel."

     [Illustration: SEKEBOBO, CHIEF OF CHAGWÃ‰. POKINO, THE
     PRIME-MINISTER. MTESA, THE EMPEROR OF UGANDA. CHAMBARANGO, THE
     CHIEF.

     OTHER CHIEFS.

     (_From a Photograph by Mr. Stanley._)]

     "The _kabaka_, a tall, clean-faced, large-eyed, nervous-looking,
     thin man, clad in a tarbush, black robe, with a white shirt belted
     with gold, shook my hands warmly and impressively, and, bowing not
     ungracefully, invited me to be seated on an iron stool. I waited
     for him to show the example, and then I and all the others seated
     ourselves.

     "He first took a deliberate survey of me, which I returned with
     interest, for he was as interesting to me as I was to him. His
     impression of me was that I was younger than Speke, not so tall,
     but better dressed. This I gathered from his criticisms, as
     confided to his chiefs and favorites.

     "My impression of him was that he and I would become better
     acquainted, that I should make a convert of him, and make him
     useful to Africa--but what other impressions I had may be gathered
     from the remarks I wrote that evening in my diary:

     [Illustration: DWARF AT THE KING'S COURT.]

     "'As I had read Speke's book for the sake of its geographical
     information, I retained but a dim remembrance of his description of
     his life in Uganda. If I remember rightly, Speke described a
     youthful prince, vain and heartless, a wholesale murderer and
     tyrant, one who delighted in fat women. Doubtless he described what
     he saw, but it is far from being the state of things now. Mtesa has
     impressed me as being an intelligent and distinguished prince, who,
     if aided in time by virtuous philanthropists, will do more for
     Central Africa than fifty years of gospel teaching, unaided by such
     authority, can do. I think I see in him the light that shall
     lighten the darkness of this benighted region; a prince well worthy
     the most hearty sympathies that Europe can give him. In this man I
     see the possible fruition of Livingstone's hopes, for with his aid
     the civilization of equatorial Africa becomes feasible. I remember
     the ardor and love which animated Livingstone when he spoke of
     Sekeletu; had he seen Mtesa, his ardor and love for him had been
     tenfold, and his pen and tongue would have been employed in calling
     all good men to assist him.'

     "Five days later I wrote the following entry:

     "'I see that Mtesa is a powerful emperor, with great influence over
     his neighbors. I have to-day seen the turbulent Mankorongo, King of
     Usui, and Mirambo, that terrible phantom who disturbs men's minds
     in Unyamwezi, through their embassies kneeling and tendering their
     tribute to him. I saw over three thousand soldiers of Mtesa nearly
     half civilized. I saw about a hundred chiefs who might be classed
     in the same scale as the men of Zanzibar and Oman, clad in as rich
     robes and armed in the same fashion, and have witnessed with
     astonishment such order and law as is obtainable in semi-civilized
     countries. All this is the result of a poor Muslim's labor; his
     name is Muley bin Salim. He it was who first began teaching here
     the doctrines of Islam. False and contemptible as these doctrines
     are, they are preferable to the ruthless instincts of a savage
     despot, whom Speke and Grant left wallowing in the blood of women,
     and I honor the memory of Muley bin Salim--Muslim and slave-trader
     though he be--the poor priest who has wrought this happy change.
     With a strong desire to improve still more the character of Mtesa,
     I shall begin building on the foundation-stones laid by Muley bin
     Salim. I shall destroy his belief in Islam, and teach the doctrines
     of Jesus of Nazareth.'

     "It may easily be gathered from these entries that a feeling of
     admiration for Mtesa must have begun very early, and that either
     Mtesa is a very admirable man, or that I am a very impressionable
     traveller, or that Mtesa is so perfect in the art of duplicity and
     acted so clever a part, that I became his dupe."

Here Frank paused, and suggested that they would leave Mr. Stanley with
the King of Uganda until the next day, when Fred would take up the
reading during the afternoon and evening. As it was near the time for
retiring, no one made any objection to adjournment, and in a very few
minutes the members of the impromptu geographical society had
dispersed.




CHAPTER IV.

PERSONAL APPEARANCE OF KING MTESA.--HIS RECEPTION OF MR. STANLEY.--A
NAVAL REVIEW.--STANLEY'S MARKSMANSHIP.--THE KING'S PALACE.--RUBAGA, THE
KING'S CAPITAL.--RECEPTION AT THE PALACE.--MEETING COLONEL LINANT DE
BELLEFONDS.--CONVERTING MTESA TO CHRISTIANITY.--APPEAL FOR MISSIONARIES
TO BE SENT TO MTESA.--DEPARTURE FOR USUKUMU.--FIGHT WITH THE NATIVES AT
BUMBIREH ISLAND.--SUFFERINGS OF STANLEY AND HIS COMPANIONS ON LAKE
VICTORIA.--A NARROW ESCAPE.--RETURN TO KAGEHYI.--DEATH OF FRED
BARKER.--EMBARKING THE EXPEDITION.--KING LUKONGEH AND HIS PEOPLE.


It was Fred's turn to read on the second day of the voyage, and early in
the morning he began his preparations. With the aid of Mr. Stanley he
marked the portions of the chapters that he would read and those that
could be omitted in view of the brief time at their disposal. At the
opening of the afternoon session of his geographical society Fred
announced that he would begin the day's work by reading the description
of King Mtesa's personal appearance as Mr. Stanley has recorded it.

[Illustration: THE KING'S DINNER-DISH.]

     "In person Mtesa is tall, probably six feet one inch, and slender.
     He has very intelligent and agreeable features, reminding me of
     some of the faces of the great stone images at Thebes, and of the
     statues in the museum at Cairo. He has the same fulness of lips,
     but their grossness is relieved by the general expression of
     amiability blended with dignity that pervades his face, and the
     large, lustrous, lambent eyes that lend it a strange beauty, and
     are typical of the race from which I believe him to have sprung.
     His color is of a dark red-brown, of a wonderfully smooth surface.
     When not engaged in council he throws off unreservedly the bearing
     that characterizes him when on the throne, and gives rein to his
     humor, indulging in hearty peals of laughter. He seems to be
     interested in the discussion of the manners and customs of
     European courts, and to be enamoured of hearing of the wonders of
     civilization. He is ambitious to imitate, as much as lies in his
     power, the ways of the white man. When any piece of information is
     given him, he takes upon himself the task of translating it to his
     wives and chiefs, though many of the latter understand the Swahili
     language as well as he does himself."

"Mr. Stanley writes that the king treated him with great courtesy," said
Fred, after a short pause, "and they evidently liked each other's
acquaintance. One day the king invited him to witness a naval review on
the waters of Murchison Bay, on which Usavara is situated; at a signal
from Mtesa forty magnificent canoes, each rowed by thirty men, swept
around a point of land and drew up in front of the shore where the king
and his guest and attendants were stationed. The captain of each canoe
was dressed in a white cotton shirt and a cloth head-cover, neatly
folded turban fashion, while the admiral wore over his shirt a crimson
jacket, profusely decorated with gold braid, and on his head the red fez
of Zanzibar. Each captain, as he passed the king, seized shield and
spear, and went through the performance of defence and attack by water.

"When the review was over the king asked Stanley, whom he called
Stamlee, to show him how the white men could shoot. It was a heavy
responsibility to be thus the representative of the shooting abilities
of the whole white race, but there was no way of escaping it. A young
crocodile was asleep on the rocks, and Stanley nearly severed its head
from its body at the distance of one hundred yards with a three-ounce
ball, an act which was accepted as conclusive proof that all white men
are dead-shots.

"And now," said Fred, "I will read the account of Mr. Stanley's visit to
Rubaga, the capital city of Uganda. It is about ten miles from Usavara,
the place where Mr. Stanley met the king, as has just been described.
His majesty was on a hunting excursion at Usavara at the time of the
explorer's arrival; he was accompanied by his court, after the manner of
the kings of other countries under similar circumstances.

     "On the 10th of April the court broke up its hunting-lodges at
     Usavara, on Murchison Bay, and moved to the capital, whither I was
     strongly urged to follow. Mtesa, escorted by about two hundred
     musketeers and the great Wakungu and their armed retainers,
     travelled quickly; but owing to my being obliged to house my boat
     from the hot sun, I did not reach the capital until 1 P.M.

     "The road had been prepared for his Imperial Majesty's hunting
     excursion, and was eight feet wide, through jungle and garden,
     forest and field. Beautiful landscapes were thus enjoyed of rolling
     land and placid lake, of gigantic tamarinds and gum-trees, of
     extensive banana groves and plantations of the ficus, from the
     bark of which the national dress, or _mbugu_, is made. The
     peculiar domelike huts, each with an attempt at a portico, were
     buried deep in dense bowers of plantains which filled the air with
     the odor of their mellow rich fruit.

     [Illustration: FISH FOUND IN LAKE VICTORIA.

     Sama-Moa, in the Nyassa tongue; round, open-mouthed, scaled, and
     pig-headed-looking creature, twenty inches long.]

     "The road wound upward to the summits of green hills which
     commanded exquisite prospects, and down again into the sheltered
     bosoms of woody nooks and vales and tree-embowered ravines. Streams
     of clear water murmured through these depressions, as they flowed
     towards Murchison Bay. The verdure was of a brilliant green,
     freshened by the unfailing rains of the equator; the sky was of the
     bluest, and the heat, though great, was tempered by the hill
     breezes, and frequently by the dense foliage overhead.

     "Within three hours' march from Usavara, we saw the capital
     crowning the summit of a smooth, rounded hill--a large cluster of
     tall, conical grass huts, in the centre of which rose a spacious,
     lofty, barnlike structure. The large building, we were told, was
     the palace! the hill, Rubaga; the cluster of huts, the imperial
     capital!

     "From each side of the tall cane fence enclosing the grass huts on
     Rubaga hill radiated very broad avenues, imperial enough in width.
     Arriving at the base of the hill, and crossing by a 'corduroy' road
     over a broad slimy ooze, we came up to one of these avenues, the
     ground of which was a reddish clay strongly mixed with the detritus
     of hematite. It gave a clear breadth of one hundred feet of
     prepared ground, and led by a gradual ascent to the circular road
     which made the circuit of the hill outside the palace enclosure.
     Once on the domelike height, we saw that we had arrived by the back
     avenue, for the best view of this capital of magnificent distances
     was that which was obtained by looking from the _burzah_ of the
     palace, and carrying the eye over the broad front highway, on each
     side of which, as far as could be defined from the shadows of the
     _burzah_, the Wakungu had their respective courts and houses,
     embowered in gardens of banana and fig. Like the enclosure round
     the palace courts and quarters, each avenue was fenced with tall
     _matetÃ©_ (water cane) neatly set very close together in uniform
     rows. The by-streets leading from one avenue to another were narrow
     and crooked.

     [Illustration: RUBAGA, THE CAPITAL OF THE KING OF UGANDA.]

     "While I stood admiring the view, a page came up, and, kneeling,
     announced that he had been despatched by the emperor to show me my
     house. Following him, I was ushered within a corner lot of the
     fenced square, between two avenues, into what I might appropriately
     term a 'garden villa' of Uganda. My house, standing in the centre
     of a plantain garden about one hundred feet square, was twenty feet
     long, and of a marquee shape, with a miniature portico or eave
     projecting like a bonnet over the doorway, and was divided into two
     apartments. Close by, about thirty feet off, were three domelike
     huts for the boat's crew and the kitchen, and in a corner of the
     garden was a railed space for our bullocks and goats. Were it not
     that I was ever anxious about my distant camp in Usukuma, I
     possessed almost everything requisite to render a month's stay very
     agreeable, and for the time I was as proud of my tiny villa as a
     London merchant is of his country-house.

     "In the afternoon I was invited to the palace. A number of people
     in brown robes, or white dresses, some with white goat-skins over
     their brown robes, others with cords folded like a turban round
     their heads, which I heard were distinguishing marks of the
     executioners, were also ascending to the _burzah_. Court after
     court was passed until we finally stood upon the level top in front
     of the great house of cane and straw which the Waganda fondly term
     _kibuga_, or the palace. The space at least was of aulic extent,
     and the prospect gained at every point was also worthy of the
     imperial eyes of the African monarch.

     "On all sides rolled in grand waves a voluptuous land of sunshine
     and plenty and early summer verdure, cooled by soft breezes from
     the great equatorial fresh-water sea. Isolated hill-cones, similar
     to that of Rubaga, or square tabular masses, rose up from the
     beautiful landscape to attract, like mysteries, the curious
     stranger's observation, and villages and banana groves of still
     fresher green, far removed on the crest of distant swelling ridges,
     announced that Mtesa owned a land worth loving. Dark, sinuous lines
     traced the winding courses of deep ravines filled with trees, and
     grassy extents of gently undulating ground marked the pastures;
     broader depressions suggested the cultivated gardens and the grain
     fields, while on the far verge of the horizon we saw the beauty and
     the charm of the land melting into the blues of distance.

     "The drums sounded. Mtesa had seated himself on the throne, and we
     hastened to take our seats.

     [Illustration: FLEET OF THE KING OF UGANDA, READY FOR WAR.]

     "Since the 5th of April, I had enjoyed ten interviews with Mtesa,
     and during all I had taken occasion to introduce topics which would
     lead up to the subject of Christianity. Nothing occurred in my
     presence but I contrived to turn it towards effecting that which
     had become an object to me, viz., his conversion. There was no
     attempt made to confuse him with the details of any particular
     doctrine. I simply drew for him the image of the Son of God
     humbling himself for the good of all mankind, white and black, and
     told him how, while he was in man's disguise, he was seized and
     crucified by wicked people who scorned his divinity, and yet out of
     his great love for them, while yet suffering on the cross, he asked
     his great Father to forgive them. I showed the difference in
     character between him whom white men love and adore, and Mohammed,
     whom the Arabs revere; how Jesus endeavored to teach mankind that
     we should love all men, excepting none, while Mohammed taught his
     followers that the slaying of the pagan and the unbeliever was an
     act that merited Paradise. I left it to Mtesa and his chiefs to
     decide which was the worthier character. I also sketched in brief
     the history of religious belief from Adam to Mohammed. I had also
     begun to translate to him the Ten Commandments, and Idi, the
     emperor's writer, transcribed in Kiganda the words of the Law as
     given to him in choice Swahili by Robert Feruzi, one of my boat's
     crew, and a pupil of the Universities Mission at Zanzibar.

     [Illustration: AUDIENCE-HALL OF THE PALACE AT RUBAGA.]

     "The enthusiasm with which I launched into this work of teaching
     was soon communicated to Mtesa and some of his principal chiefs,
     who became so absorbingly interested in the story as I gave it to
     them that little of other business was done. The political _burzah_
     and seat of justice had now become an alcove, where only the moral
     and religious laws were discussed.

     "Before we broke up our meeting Mtesa informed me that I should
     meet a _white man_ at his palace the next day.

     "'A white man, or a Turk?'

     "'A white man like yourself,' repeated Mtesa.

     "'No; impossible."

     "'Yes, you will see. He comes from Masr (Cairo), from Gordoom
     (Gordon) Pasha.'

     "'Ah, very well, I shall be glad to see him, and if he is really a
     white man, I may probably stay with you four or five days longer,'
     said I to Mtesa, as I shook hands with him, and bade him
     good-night.

     "The 'white man,' reported to be coming the next day, arrived at
     noon with great _Ã©clat_ and flourishes of trumpets, the sounds of
     which could be heard all over the capital. Mtesa hurried off a page
     to invite me to his _burzah_. I hastened up by a private entrance.
     Mtesa and all his chiefs, guards, pages, executioners, claimants,
     guests, drummers, and fifers were already there, _en grande
     tenue_.

     "Mtesa was in a fever, as I could see by the paling of the color
     under his eyes and his glowing eyeballs. The chiefs shared their
     master's excitement.

     "'What shall we do,' he asked, 'to welcome him?'

     "'Oh, form your troops in line from the entrance to the _burzah_
     down to the gate of the outer court, and present arms, and as he
     comes within the gate let your drums and fifes sound a loud
     welcome.'

     [Illustration: WOODEN KETTLE-DRUM.]

     "'Beautiful!' said Mtesa. 'Hurry Tori, Chambarango, Sekebobo; form
     them in two lines just as Stamlee says. Oh, that is beautiful! And
     shall we fire guns, Stamlee?'

     "'No, not until you shake hands with him; and, as he is a soldier,
     let the guards fire, then they will not injure any one.'

     "Mtesa's flutter of excitement on this occasion made me think that
     there must have been a somewhat similar scene before my landing at
     Usavara, and that Tori must have been consulted frequently upon the
     form of ceremony to be adopted.

     "What followed upon the arrival of the white man at the outer gate
     had best be told as an interlude by the stranger himself.

     [Illustration: AFRICAN HATCHET, SPADE, AND ADZE.]

     "'At two o'clock, the weather having cleared up, Mtesa sent a
     messenger to inform me that he was ready to receive me. Notice is
     given in the camp; every one puts on his finest clothes; at last we
     are ready; my brave Soudanians look quite smart in their red
     jackets and white trousers. I place myself at their head; trumpets
     flourish and drums sound as we follow an avenue from eighty-five to
     a hundred yards wide, running direct north and south, and
     terminating at Mtesa's palace....

     "'On entering this court, I am greeted with a frightful uproar; a
     thousand instruments, each one more outlandish than the other,
     produce the most discordant and deafening sounds. Mtesa's
     body-guard carrying guns present arms on my appearance; the king is
     standing at the entrance of the reception-hall, I approach and bow
     to him _Ã  la turque_. He holds out his hand, which I press; I
     immediately perceive a sunburnt European to the left of the king, a
     traveller, whom I imagine to be Cameron. We exchange glances
     without speaking.

     "'Mtesa enters the reception-room, and we follow him. It is a
     narrow hall about sixty feet long by fifteen feet wide, the ceiling
     of which, sloping down at the entrance, is supported by a double
     row of wooden pillars which divide the room into two aisles. The
     principal and central room is unoccupied, and leads to the king's
     throne; the two aisles are filled with the great dignitaries and
     chief officers. At each pillar stands one of the king's guard,
     wearing a long red mantle, a white turban ornamented with
     monkey-skin, white trousers and black blouse with a red band. All
     are armed with guns.

     "'Mtesa takes his place on his throne, which is a wooden seat in
     the shape of an office arm-chair; his feet rest upon a cushion; the
     whole placed on a leopard's skin spread over a Smyrna carpet.
     Before the king is a highly-polished elephant's tusk, and at his
     feet are two boxes containing fetiches; on either side the throne
     is a lance (one copper, the other steel), each held by a guard;
     these are the insignia of Uganda; the dog which Speke mentions has
     been done away with. Crouching at the foot of the king are the
     vizier and two scribes.

     "'Mtesa is dignified in his manner, and does not lack a certain
     natural air of distinction; his dress is elegant--a white _couftan_
     finished with a red band, stockings, slippers, vest of black cloth
     embroidered with gold, and a _tarbouche_ with a silver plate on the
     top. He wears a sword with ivory-inlaid hilt (a Zanzibar weapon),
     and a staff.

     "'I exhibited my presents, which Mtesa scarcely pretended to see,
     his dignity forbidding him to show any curiosity.

     "'I address the traveller, who sits in front of me, on the left of
     the king: "Have I the honor of speaking to Mr. Cameron?"

     "'STANLEY. "No, sir; Mr. Stanley."

     "'MYSELF. "M. Linant de Bellefonds, member of the Gordon-Pasha
     Expedition."

     "'We bow low to each other, as though we had met in a drawing-room,
     and our conversation is at an end for the moment.

     "'This meeting with Mr. Stanley greatly surprises me. Stanley was
     far from my thoughts; I was totally ignorant of the object of his
     expedition.

     "'I take leave of the king, who meanwhile has been amusing himself
     by making my unlucky soldiers parade and flourish their trumpets. I
     shake hands with Mr. Stanley, and ask him to honor me with his
     presence at dinner.'

     "Colonel Linant de Bellefonds having thus described our meeting,
     there remains but little for me to add.

     "As soon as I saw him approaching the _burzah_, I recognized him to
     be a Frenchman. Not being introduced to him--and as I was then but
     a mere guest of Mtesa, with whom it was M. Linant's first desire
     to converse--I simply bowed to him, until he had concluded
     addressing the emperor, when our introduction took place as he has
     described.

     [Illustration: HEAD OF A "MADOQUA"--SPECIES OF ANTELOPE.]

     "I was delighted at seeing him, and much more delighted when I
     discovered that M. Linant was a very agreeable man. I observed that
     there was a vast difference between his treatment of his men and
     the manner in which I treated mine, and that his intercourse with
     the Waganda was conducted after exactly opposite principles to
     those which governed my conduct. He adopted a half-military style
     which the Waganda ill brooked, and many things uncomplimentary to
     him were uttered by them. He stationed guards at the entrance to
     his courtyard to keep the Waganda at a distance, except those
     bearing messages from Mtesa, while my courtyard was nearly full of
     Watongolehs, soldiers, pages, children, with many a dark-brown
     woman listening with open ears to my conversation with the Waganda.
     In fact, my courtyard from morning to night swarmed with all
     classes, for I loved to draw the natives to talk, so that perfect
     confidence might be established between us, and I might gain an
     insight into their real natures. By this freer converse with them I
     became, it seemed, a universal favorite, and obtained information
     sufficient to fill two octavo volumes.

     "M. Linant passed many pleasant hours with me. Though he had started
     from Cairo previous to my departure from Zanzibar, and consequently
     could communicate no news from Europe, I still felt that for a
     brief period I enjoyed civilized life. The religious conversations
     which I had begun with Mtesa were maintained in the presence of M.
     Linant de Bellefonds; when questioned by Mtesa about the facts
     which I had uttered, and which had been faithfully transcribed, M.
     Linant, to Mtesa's astonishment, employed nearly the same words,
     and delivered the same responses. The remarkable fact that two
     white men, who had never met before, one having arrived from the
     southeast, the other having emerged from the north, should
     nevertheless both know the same things, and respond in the same
     words, charmed the popular mind without the _burzah_ as a wonder,
     and was treasured in Mtesa's memory as being miraculous.

     "The period of my stay with Mtesa drew to a close, and I requested
     leave to depart, begging the fulfilment of a promise he had made to
     me that he would furnish me with transport sufficient to convey the
     expedition by water from Kagehyi in Usukuma to Uganda. Nothing
     loath, since one white man would continue his residence with him
     till my return, and being eager to see the gifts I told him were
     safe at Usukuma, he gave his permission, and commanded Magassa to
     collect thirty canoes, and to accompany me to my camp. On the 15th
     of April, then, escorted by Magassa and his Watongolehs, and also
     by M. Linant and ten of his Nubian soldiers, we left Rubaga and
     arrived at Usavara.

     "In the evening I concluded my letters dated 14th of April, 1875,
     which were sent to the _Daily Telegraph_ and the New York _Herald_,
     the English and American journals I represented here, appealing for
     a Christian mission to be sent to Mtesa.

     "The appeal, written hurriedly, and included in the letter left at
     Usavara, was as follows:

     "'I have, indeed, undermined Islamism so much here that Mtesa has
     determined henceforth, until he is better informed, to observe the
     Christian Sabbath as well as the Moslem Sabbath, and the great
     captains have unanimously consented to this. He has further caused
     the Ten Commandments of Moses to be written on a board for his
     daily perusal--for Mtesa can read Arabic--as well as the Lord's
     Prayer and the golden commandment of our Saviour, "Thou shalt love
     thy neighbor as thyself." This is great progress for the few days
     that I have remained with him, and, though I am no missionary, I
     shall begin to think that I might become one if such success is
     feasible. But, oh! that some pious, practical missionary would come
     here! What a field and harvest ripe for the sickle of civilization!
     Mtesa would give him anything he desired--houses, lands, cattle,
     ivory, etc.; he might call a province his own in one day. It is not
     the mere preacher, however, that is wanted here. The bishops of
     Great Britain collected, with all the classic youth of Oxford and
     Cambridge, would effect nothing by mere talk with the intelligent
     people of Uganda. It is the practical Christian tutor, who can
     teach people how to become Christians, cure their diseases,
     construct dwellings, understand and exemplify agriculture, and turn
     his hand to anything, like a sailor--this is the man who is wanted.
     Such a one, if he can be found, would become the saviour of Africa.
     He must be tied to no church or sect, but profess God and his Son
     and the moral law, and live a blameless Christian, inspired by
     liberal principles, charity to all men, and devout faith in Heaven.
     He must belong to no nation in particular, but to the entire white
     race. Such a man, or men, Mtesa, Emperor of Uganda, Usoga, Unyoro,
     and KaragwÃ©--an empire three hundred and sixty geographical miles
     in length, by fifty in breadth--invites to repair to him. He has
     begged me to tell the white men that, if they will only come to
     him, he will give them all they want. Now, where is there in all
     the pagan world a more promising field for a mission than Uganda?
     Colonel Linant de Bellefonds is my witness that I speak the
     truth, and I know he will corroborate all I say. The colonel,
     though a Frenchman, is a Calvinist, and has become as ardent a
     well-wisher for the Waganda as I am. Then why further spend
     needlessly vast sums upon black pagans of Africa who have no
     example of their own people becoming Christians before them? I
     speak to the Universities Mission at Zanzibar and to the Free
     Methodists at Mombasa, to the leading philanthropists and the pious
     people of England. "Here, gentlemen, is your opportunity--embrace
     it! The people on the shores of the Nyanza call upon you. Obey your
     own generous instincts, and listen to them; and I assure you that
     in one year you will have more converts to Christianity than all
     other missionaries united can number. The population of Mtesa's
     kingdom is very dense; I estimate the number of his subjects at two
     millions. You need not fear to spend money upon such a mission, as
     Mtesa is sole ruler, and will repay its cost tenfold with ivory,
     coffee, otter-skins of a very fine quality, or even in cattle, for
     the wealth of this country in all these products is immense. The
     road here is by the Nile, or _via_ Zanzibar, Ugogo, and UnyanyembÃ©.
     The former route, so long as Colonel Gordon governs the countries
     of the Upper Nile, seems the most feasible."'

     [Illustration: SHUGRANGU HOUSE, AN AFRICAN MISSION STATION, WITH
     GRAVE OF MRS. LIVINGSTONE.]

     "When the letters were written and sealed I committed them to the
     charge of Colonel Linant. My friend promised he would await my
     return from Usukuma; meanwhile he lent me a powerful field-glass,
     as mine, being considerably injured, had been given to Mtesa.

     "The parting between M. Linant and myself I shall allow him to
     describe:

     "'At 5 A.M. drums are beaten; the boats going with Stanley are
     collecting together.

     "'Mr. Stanley and myself are soon ready. The _Lady Alice_ is
     unmoored; luggage, sheep, goats, and poultry are already stowed
     away in their places. There is nothing to be done except to hoist
     the American flag and head the boat southward. I accompany Stanley
     to his boat; we shake hands and commend each other to the care of
     God. Stanley takes the helm; the _Lady Alice_ immediately swerves
     like a spirited horse, and bounds forward lashing the water of the
     Nyanza into foam. The starry flag is hoisted, and floats proudly in
     the breeze; I immediately raise a loud hurrah with such hearty
     good-will as perhaps never before greeted the traveller's ears.

     "'The _Lady Alice_ is already far away. We wave our handkerchiefs
     as a last farewell; my heart is full; I have just lost a brother. I
     had grown used to seeing Stanley, the open-hearted, sympathetic man
     and friend and admirable traveller. With him I forgot my fatigue;
     this meeting had been like a return to my own country. His
     engaging, instructive conversation made the hours pass like
     minutes. I hope I may see him again, and have the happiness of
     spending several days with him.'"

One of the youthful auditors asked at this point what became of Colonel
Linant de Bellefonds. Fred replied as follows to the inquiry:

"He remained about six weeks at Mtesa's court, looking for the return of
Mr. Stanley. The latter was delayed in various ways, and finally Colonel
Linant started on his return to Gondokoro, to report to his superior
officer, Gordon Pasha. He had a severe battle with the natives of
Unyoro; it lasted several hours, but he managed to escape and reach
Gordon Pasha's headquarters. In the following August he was sent on an
expedition among the Bari tribe, and, at a place called Labore, he and
all the men accompanying him were killed. He was an efficient officer,
and was greatly liked by those with whom he served.

[Illustration: WARRIORS OF THE UPPER NILE REGION.]

"Mr. Stanley was greatly delayed on his return to Usukuma," Fred
continued, "by the inefficiency of Magassa and his habits of
procrastination. He did not assemble the required number of canoes which
Mtesa had promised, and when Stanley sent him for more he returned
without them. His whole course of action was one of duplicity, and
caused a great deal of trouble and delay to the expedition. Stanley was
not sufficiently powerful to force him to obey, and he was too far away
from Mtesa's capital to inform the king of the bad conduct of his
lieutenant.

"On the way down the coast Mr. Stanley explored the Alexandra Nile for a
short distance. He reported it about five hundred yards wide at its
mouth, and narrowed to a width of one hundred yards about two miles
above. Its current was so strong that the _Lady Alice_ breasted it with
difficulty, and, after an ascent of three miles, the attempt to go
farther was abandoned. In one place a depth of eighty-five feet was
obtained with the sounding-line, and it was evident that the volume of
water discharged by the river is very large. The people residing in the
valley of the Alexandra Nile call it 'the mother of the river at Jinga,'
or the Ripon Falls.

"At Bumbireh Island the expedition stopped to purchase food, of which
they had run short, but the natives proved to be unfriendly. Bumbireh is
about eleven miles long by two in width, and has a population estimated
at four thousand, scattered in some fifty villages. Here is Mr.
Stanley's account of his experiences at this island.

     "At 9 A.M. we discovered a cove near the southeast end of the long
     island, and pulled slowly into it. Immediately the natives rushed
     down the slopes, shouting war-cries and uttering fierce
     ejaculations. When about fifty yards from the shore I bade the men
     cease rowing, but Safeni and Baraka became eloquent, and said, 'It
     is almost always the case, master, with savages. They cry out and
     threaten and look big, but you will see that all that noise will
     cease as soon as they hear us speak. Besides, if we leave here
     without food, where shall we obtain it?'

     "The last argument was unanswerable, and though I gave no orders to
     resume their oars, four of the men impelled the boat on slowly,
     while Safeni and Baraka prepared themselves to explain to the
     natives, who were now close within hearing, as they came rushing to
     the water's edge. I saw some lift great stones, while others
     prepared their bows.

     "We were now about ten yards from the beach, and Safeni and Baraka
     spoke, earnestly pointing to their mouths, and by gestures
     explaining that their bellies were empty. They smiled with
     insinuating faces; uttered the words 'brothers,' 'friends,' 'good
     fellows,' most volubly; cunningly interpolated the words Mtesa--the
     _kabaka_--Uganda, and Antari, King of Ihangiro, to whom Bumbireh
     belongs. Safeni and Baraka's pleasant volubility seemed to have
     produced a good effect, for the stones were dropped, the bows were
     unstrung, and the lifted spears lowered to assist the steady,
     slow-walking pace with which they now advanced.

     [Illustration: RECEPTION AT BUMBIREH ISLAND, VICTORIA NYANZA.]

     "Safeni and Baraka turned to me triumphantly, and asked, 'What did
     we say, master?' and then, with engaging frankness, invited the
     natives, who were now about two hundred in number, to come closer.
     The natives consulted a little while, and several--now smiling
     pleasantly themselves--advanced leisurely into the water until they
     touched the boat's prow. They stood a few seconds talking sweetly,
     when suddenly, with a rush, they ran the boat ashore; and then all
     the others, seizing hawser and gunwale, dragged her about twenty
     yards over the rocky beach high and dry, leaving us almost
     stupefied with astonishment!

     "Then ensued a scene which beggars description. A forest of spears
     was levelled; thirty or forty bows were drawn taut; as many barbed
     arrows seemed already on the wing; thick, knotty clubs waved above
     our heads; two hundred screaming black demons jostled with each
     other, and struggled for room to vent their fury, or for an
     opportunity to deliver one crushing blow or thrust at us.

     "In the meantime, as soon as the first symptoms of this
     manifestation of violence had been observed, I had sprung to my
     feet, each hand armed with a loaded self-cocking revolver. But the
     apparent hopelessness of inflicting much injury upon such a large
     crowd restrained me, and Safeni turned to me, though almost cowed
     to dumbness by the loud fury around us, and pleaded with me to be
     patient. I complied, seeing that I should get no aid from my crew;
     but, while bitterly blaming myself for my imprudence in having
     yielded--against my instincts--to placing myself in the power of
     such savages, I vowed that, if I escaped this once, my own judgment
     should guide my actions for the future.

     "I assumed a resigned air, though I still retained my revolvers. My
     crew also bore the first outburst of the tempest of shrieking rage
     which assailed them with almost sublime imperturbability. Safeni
     crossed his arms with the meekness of a saint. Baraka held his
     hands palms outward, asking, with serene benignity, 'What, my
     friends, ails you? Do you fear empty hands and smiling people like
     us? We are friends; we came, as friends, to buy food, two or three
     bananas, a few mouthfuls of grain or potatoes or muhogo (cassava),
     and, if you permit us, we shall depart as friends.'

     "Our demeanor had a great effect. The riot and noise seemed to be
     subsiding, when some fifty new-comers rekindled the smouldering
     fury. Again the forest of spears swayed on the launch, again the
     knotty clubs were whirled aloft, again the bows were drawn, and
     again the barbed arrows seemed flying. Safeni received a push which
     sent him tumbling; little Kirango received a blow on the head with
     a spear-staff; Saramba gave a cry as a club descended on his back.

     "I sprang up this time to remonstrate, with the two revolvers in my
     left hand. I addressed myself to an elder, who seemed to be
     restraining the people from proceeding too far. I showed him beads,
     cloth, wire, and invoked the names of Mtesa, and Antari their king.

     "The sight of the heaps of beads and cloth I exposed awakened,
     however, the more deliberate passions of selfishness and greed in
     each heart. An attempt at massacre, they began to argue, would
     certainly entail the loss of some of themselves. 'Guns might be
     seized, and handled with terrible effect, even by dying men, and
     who knows what those little iron things in the white man's hands
     are?' they seemed to be asking themselves. The elder, whatever he
     thought, responded with an affectation of indignation, raised his
     stick, and to the right and left of him drove back the demoniac
     crowd. Other prominent men now assisted this elder, whom we
     subsequently discovered to be Shekka, the King of Bumbireh.

     "Shekka then, having thus bestirred himself, beckoned to half a
     dozen men, and walked away a few yards behind the mass. Half the
     crowd followed the king and his council, while the other half
     remained to indulge their tongues on us, and to continually menace
     us with either club or spear.

     [Illustration: HUT AND GRANARY ON THE ISLAND.]

     "The issue had surely arrived. There had been just one brief moment
     of agony when I reflected how unlovely death appears in such guise
     as that in which it then threatened me. What would my people think
     as they anxiously waited for the never-returning master! What would
     Pocock and Barker say when they heard of the tragedy of Bumbireh!
     And my friends in America and Europe!

     "A messenger from the king and the council arrives, and beckons
     Safeni. I said to him, 'Safeni, use your wit.' 'Please God,
     master,' he replied.

     "Safeni drew nearly all the crowd after him, for curiosity is
     strong in the African. I saw him pose himself. A born diplomatist
     was Safeni. His hands moved up and down, outward and inward; a
     cordial frankness sat naturally on his face; his gestures were
     graceful; the man was an orator, pleading for mercy and justice.

     "Safeni returned, his face radiant. 'It is all right, master, there
     is no fear. They say we must stop here until to-morrow.'

     "'Will they sell us food?'

     "'Oh, yes, as soon as they settle their shauri.'

     "While Safeni was speaking six men rushed up and seized the oars.

     "Safeni, though hitherto politic, lost temper at this, and
     endeavored to prevent them. They raised their clubs to strike him.
     I shouted out, 'Let them go, Safeni.'

     "'A loud cheer greeted the seizure of the oars. I became convinced
     now that this one little act would lead to others; for man is the
     same all over the world. If a man submit once, he must be prepared
     to submit again.

     "The 'shauri' proceeded. Another messenger came, demanding five
     cloths and five fundo of necklaces. They were delivered. But as it
     was now near noon, and they were assured we could not escape, the
     savages withdrew to their nearest village to refresh themselves
     with wine and food.

     "After the warriors had departed some women came to look at us. We
     spoke kindly to them, and in return they gave us the consoling
     assurance that we should be killed, but they said that if we could
     induce Shekka to make blood-brotherhood, or to eat honey with one
     of us, we should be safe. If we failed, there was only flight or
     death. We thanked them, but we would wait.

     [Illustration: A WOMAN OF THE ISLAND.]

     "About 3 P.M. we heard a number of drums beaten. Safeni was told
     that if the natives collected again he must endeavor to induce
     Shekka with gifts to go through the process of blood-brotherhood.

     "A long line of natives in full war costume appeared on the crest
     of the terrace, on which the banana grove and village of Kajurri
     stood. Their faces were smeared with black and white pigments.
     Almost all of them bore the peculiar shields of Usongora. Their
     actions were such as the dullest-witted of us recognized as
     indicating hostilities.

     "Even Safeni and Baraka were astounded, and their first words were
     'Prepare, master. Truly, this is trouble.'

     "'Never mind me,' I replied, 'I have been ready these three hours.
     Are you ready, your guns and revolvers loaded, and your ears open
     this time?'

     "'We are,' they all firmly answered.

     "'Don't be afraid; be quite cool. We will try, while they are
     collecting together, the women's suggestion. Go frankly and
     smilingly, Safeni, up to Shekka, on the top of that hill, and offer
     him these three fundo of beads, and ask him to exchange blood with
     you.'

     "Safeni proceeded readily on his errand, for there was no danger to
     him bodily while we were there within one hundred and fifty yards,
     and their full power as yet unprepared. For ten minutes he
     conversed with them, while the drums kept beating, and numbers of
     men bepainted for war were increasing Shekka's force. Some of them
     entertained us by demonstrating with their spears how they fought.
     Their gestures were wild, their voices were shrill and fierce, they
     were kindling themselves into a fighting fever.

     "Safeni returned. Shekka had refused the pledge of peace. The
     natives now mustered over three hundred.

     "Presently fifty bold fellows came rushing down, uttering a shrill
     cry. Without hesitation they came straight to the boat, and,
     hissing something to us, seized our Kiganda drum. It was such a
     small affair, we did not resist; still the manner in which it was
     taken completely undeceived us, if any small hope of peace
     remained. Loud applause greeted the act of gallantry.

     "Then two men came down towards us, and began to drive some cows
     away that were grazing between us and the men on the hill. Safeni
     asked of one of them, 'Why do you do that?'

     [Illustration: VILLAGE ENCLOSING CATTLE.]

     "'Because we are going to begin fighting presently, and if you are
     men, you may begin to prepare yourselves,' he said, scornfully.

     "'Thanks, my bold friend,' I muttered to myself. 'Those are the
     truest words we have heard to-day.'

     "The two men were retiring up the hill. 'Here, Safeni,' I said,
     'take these two fine red cloths in your hand; walk slowly up after
     them a little way, and the minute you hear my voice run back; and
     you, my boys, this is for life and death, mind; range yourselves on
     each side of the boat, lay your hands on it carelessly, but with a
     firm grip, and when I give the word, push it with the force of a
     hundred men down the hill into the water. Are you all ready, and do
     you think you can do it? Otherwise we might as well begin fighting
     where we are.'

     'Yes, Inshallah Master,' they cried out with one voice.

     [Illustration: HEADS OF SPEARS.]

     "'Go, Safeni!'

     "I waited until he had walked fifty yards away, and saw that he
     acted precisely as I had instructed him.

     "'Push, my boys; push for your lives!"

     "The crew bent their heads and strained their arms; the boat began
     to move, and there was a hissing, grinding noise below me. I seized
     my double-barrelled elephant rifle and shouted, 'Safeni! Safeni,
     return!'

     "The natives were quick-eyed. They saw the boat moving, and with
     one accord they swept down the hill uttering the most fearful
     cries.

     "My boat was at the water's edge. 'Shoot her into the lake, my men;
     never mind the water;' and, clear of all obstruction, she darted
     out upon the lake.

     "Safeni stood for an instant on the water's edge, with the cloths
     in his hand. The foremost of a crowd of natives was about twenty
     yards from him. He raised his spear and balanced himself.

     "'Spring into the water, man, head first,' I cried.

     "The balanced spear was about to fly, and another man was preparing
     his weapon for a deadly cast, when I raised my gun and the bullet
     ploughed through him and through the second. The bowmen halted and
     drew their bows. I sent two charges of duck-shot into their midst,
     and the natives retreated from the beach on which the boat had
     lately lain.

     "Having checked the natives, I assisted one of my men into the
     boat, and ordered him to lend a hand to the others, while I
     reloaded my big guns, keeping my eyes on the natives. There was a
     point about one hundred yards in length on the east, which
     sheltered the cove. Some of the natives made a rush for this, but
     my guns commanded the exposed position, and they were obliged to
     retire.

     "The crew seized their rifles, but I told them to leave them alone,
     and to tear the bottom-boards out of the boat and use them as
     paddles; for there were two hippopotami advancing upon us
     open-mouthed, and it seemed as if we were to be crushed in the
     water after such a narrow escape from the ferocious people ashore.
     I permitted one of the hippos to approach within ten yards, and,
     aiming between his eyes, perforated his skull with a three-ounce
     ball, and the second received such a round that we were not
     molested by him.

     "It was 5 P.M. We had only four bananas in the boat, and we were
     twelve hungry men. If we had a strong fair breeze, a day and a
     night would suffice to enable us to reach our camp. But if we had
     head-winds, the journey might occupy a month. Meanwhile, where
     should we apply for food? Fresh water we had in abundance,
     sufficient to satisfy the thirst of all the armies of the
     world for a century. But food? Whither should we turn for it?"

[Illustration: CENTRAL AFRICAN GOAT.]

Fred paused a few moments while his auditors waited in breathless
anxiety for the continuation of the story.

"At night a storm came on," said Fred, "and the _Alice_ drifted
helplessly, while her occupants, weakened by nearly fifty hours without
food and drenched by the rain that fell in torrents, felt that they were
about to 'die in the Nyanza' as they had been told to do by the cruel
natives of Bumbireh. In the morning the storm abated, and they reached
an uninhabited island which Mr. Stanley appropriately named Refuge
Island. The men gathered bananas, cherries, and other fruits, while
their leader shot some ducks, so that they had an abundant supper,
which, you may be sure, was eagerly devoured. They remained two days at
Refuge Island to rest and gain strength, and also to make oars to
replace those lost at Bumbireh. Then they continued their voyage and
reached their old camp at Kagehyi without further molestation or
suffering.

"The party was welcomed most joyously by Frank Pocock and the men in
camp, but the news that greeted the explorer was full of sadness. When
he inquired for Fred Barker, young Pocock pointed to a cairn of stones
near the shore, and in a low voice said Barker had died twelve days
before, and was buried under the cairn. Several of the Zanzibaris had
died, including three of the most trustworthy men of the expedition,
while some of the worst spirits in the camp were on the verge of mutiny.
The natives had continued friendly, and the camp was so well supplied
with provisions that those who had preserved their health were in
excellent condition.

[Illustration: CAIRN ERECTED TO THE MEMORY OF FREDERICK BARKER:

MAJITA AND URURI MOUNTAINS IN THE DISTANCE, ACROSS SPEKE GULF.]

"Mr. Stanley and those who accompanied him on the boat expedition were
greatly reduced by their privations and exposure, Stanley weighing only
one hundred and fifteen pounds, or sixty-three pounds less than when he
left Zanzibar. Rest was imperative, and in Stanley's case it was
accompanied by fever which reduced him to a weight of one hundred and
eight pounds in a few days. On the fifth day he had conquered the fever
by liberal doses of quinine, but found himself very weak and pale."

One of the youths asked what became of Magassa and his fleet of canoes.

"That was what worried Mr. Stanley," replied Fred, "and during the
delirium of his fever he was constantly asking for the canoes. They
never came, and it was necessary to obtain other boats or make the
journey by land. After much bargaining and diplomacy twenty-one canoes
were purchased from Lukongeh, King of UkerewÃ©, a large island which
separates Speke Gulf from the waters of the lake. They were in poor
condition, but, by much patching and calking, were made available for
transporting the expedition to Refuge Island, where the boat party
retreated after its encounter with the natives of Bumbireh.

"Mr. Stanley gives some interesting details concerning the king and
people of UkerewÃ©.

     "The king, Lukongeh, was a handsome, open-faced, light-colored man
     about twenty-seven years old; he is supposed to be endowed with
     supernatural power, and seizes every opportunity to heighten this
     belief. He is believed to be enabled to create a drought at
     pleasure, and to cause the land to be drenched with rain. It was
     fortunate that, since his accession to power, rain had been regular
     and copious in its season. The king had not been slow to point out
     this immense advantage which UkerewÃ© had gained since he succeeded
     his father; he was therefore beloved and feared.

     [Illustration: AT THE LANDING-PLACE OF MSOSSI, KING LUKONGEH's
     CAPITAL.]

     "Aware of the value of a reputation as rain-maker, he was ambitious
     to add to it that of 'great medicine man,' and he besought me to
     impart to him some of the grand secrets of Europe--such as how to
     transform men into lions and leopards, to cause the rains to fall
     or cease, the winds to blow, and trees to produce fruit. Demands of
     this character are commonly made by African chiefs. When I stated
     my inability to comply with these requests, the king whispered to
     his chiefs:

     "'He will not give me what I ask, because he is afraid that he will
     not get the canoes; but you will see when my men return from
     Uganda, he will give me all I ask.'

     [Illustration: STOW-HOUSE FOR GRAIN.]

     "Many stories were current about the witchcraft practised by the
     people of Ukara Island, proving that those islanders have been at
     pains to spread abroad a good repute for themselves, that they are
     cunning, and, aware that superstition is a weakness of human
     nature, have sought to thrive upon it. Their power--according to
     the Wakerew--over the amphibiÃ¦ is wonderful. They had crocodiles
     which were trained to do anything they were told to do, and their
     king had a hippopotamus which came to him each morning to be
     milked!

     [Illustration: WAKEREWÃ‰ STOOL.]

     "Coils of brass wire are much coveted by the WakerewÃ©, for the
     adornment of their wives, who wear it in such numerous circlets
     round their necks as to give them at a distance an appearance of
     wearing ruffs. Wristlets of copper and brass and iron, and anklets
     of the same metal, besides armlets of ivory, are the favorite
     decorations of the men.

"Owing to the size of the expedition and the limited capacity of the
canoes, it required two journeys of the flotilla to transport the entire
party, with its baggage, from Kagehyi to Refuge Island. The work was
safely accomplished, friendly terms were made with the natives in the
vicinity; and now," said Fred, as he closed the book, "we will leave the
entire party until we assemble again in the evening."

[Illustration: WAKEREWÃ‰ DWELLING-HOUSE.]

[Illustration: FISH-NETS.]

[Illustration: WAKEREWÃ‰ CANOES.]

[Illustration: WAKEREWÃ‰ WARRIOR.]

[Illustration: STRANGE GRANITE ROCKS OF UZUI ISLAND, MIDWAY BETWEEN
USUKUMA AND UKEREWÃ‰.

(_From a Photograph by Mr. Stanley._)]




CHAPTER V.

DEPARTURE FROM REFUGE ISLAND.--ARRIVAL IN UGANDA.--MTESA AT
WAR.--STANLEY JOINS HIM AT RIPON FALLS.--A NAVAL BATTLE ON AN AFRICAN
LAKE.--THE WAGANDA REPULSED.--CAPTURE OF A WAVUMA CHIEF.--STANLEY SAVES
THE CHIEF'S LIFE.--HOW STANLEY BROUGHT THE WAR TO AN END.--HIS WONDERFUL
MACHINE FOR DESTROYING THE WAVUMA.--RETIREMENT OF THE ARMY.--STANLEY'S
RETURN TO HIS CAMP.--EXPEDITION TO MUTA NZEGE.--HOW IT FAILED.--THE
EXPEDITION MARCHES SOUTHWARD.--IN KING RUMANIKA'S COUNTRY.--ARAB TRADERS
IN AFRICA.--HAMED IBRAHIM.--KAFURRO AND LAKE WINDERMERE.--INTERVIEWS
WITH KING RUMANIKA.--EXPLORING LAKE WINDERMERE.--AN UNHAPPY
NIGHT.--IHEMA ISLAND.


When the party assembled in the evening Fred was promptly in his place
and ready for work. By way of testing the memories of his auditors he
asked them where they left Mr. Stanley's expedition at the end of the
afternoon's reading.

"We left it at Refuge Island," replied one of the youths. "The canoes
had made two journeys each way, between Kagehyi and Refuge Island, to
bring up the men and baggage."

[Illustration: USUKUMA CANOE.]

"Quite right," said Fred, "and at Refuge Island they remained for
several days, negotiating for a peaceful passage by the island of
Bumbireh. A search expedition, which was sent by King Mtesa to ascertain
what had become of his friend 'Stamlee,' joined them, and together there
was a sufficient number of canoes to carry the whole party to Uganda.

"But on arriving in Uganda," Fred continued, "Mr. Stanley found that
Mtesa had gone to war with the Wavuma, who dwell on the farther shore of
the lake, and beyond the Victoria Nile. He had marched to Usoga and
fought a battle with the Wavuma, and was then preparing a naval
expedition on a grand scale. Stanley was inclined to turn back when he
heard this news, as he feared the delay which the war would cause. After
due consideration he decided to go on, as the greater ease with which he
could travel to the Muta Nzege would offset any delay caused by Mtesa's
war.

[Illustration: ISLAND CALLED ELEPHANT ROCK.]

"He found Mtesa with his army at Ripon Falls, on the Usoga side of the
river. Warriors, women, camp-followers, and all numbered nearly two
hundred and fifty thousand, and, besides, he had a flotilla of three
hundred and twenty-five canoes, large and small. The enemy was in great
strength, though less numerous. They had a strong position on an island,
and everything promised a severely contested battle, with the chances in
favor of Mtesa. The army remained several days at Ripon Falls after
Stanley's arrival, and then marched to a point of land near Ingira, the
island where the Wavuma had their stronghold. During the delay in camp
the king and his guest were often together, and Stanley embraced the
opportunity to renew his religious instruction of Mtesa. He made an
abstract of the Scriptures, which were translated into Swahili, and thus
the king had all the principal events of the Bible, from the Creation to
the Crucifixion, in a language he could read. Finally the king declared
that he would renounce the faith of Islam, and accept Christianity, as
he believed its principles were the best.

"'Stamlee,' said Mtesa, as they parted, 'say to the white people when
you write to them, that I am like a man sitting in darkness, or born
blind, and that all I ask is that I may be taught how to see, and I
shall continue a Christian while I live.'

[Illustration: MTESA'S CAMP INGIRA.]

"The fleets of Mtesa and the Wavuma people had several encounters, but
without any decisive results. Mr. Stanley thus describes one of these
naval battles:

     "The drums sounded from the water-side, and soon the beautiful
     canoes of Uganda appeared in view. The entire war-fleet of two
     hundred and thirty vessels rode gracefully on the calm gray waters
     of the channel.

     "The line of battle was formed by Chambarango, in command of the
     right flank, with fifty canoes; Sambuzi, Mukavya, Chikwata, and
     Saruti, all sub-chiefs, were ranged with one hundred canoes, under
     the command of Kauta, the imperial steward, to form the centre; the
     left flank was in charge of the gallant Mkwenda, who had eighty
     canoes. Tori commanded a force of musketeers, and with his four
     howitzers was stationed on the causeway, which was by this time two
     hundred yards from the shore.

     "In the above manner the fleet of vessels, containing some sixteen
     thousand men, moved to the attack upon Ingira. The centre, defended
     by the flanks, which were to menace the rear of the Wavuma should
     they approach near the causeway, resolutely advanced to within
     thirty yards of Ingira, and poured in a most murderous fire among
     the slingers of the island, who, imagining that the Waganda meant
     to carry the island by storm, boldly stood exposed, resolved to
     fight. But they were unable to maintain that courageous behavior
     long. Mkwenda then moved up from the left, and attacked with his
     musketeers the Wavuma on the right, riddling their canoes, and
     making matters specially hot for them in that quarter.

     [Illustration: ONE OF THE GREAT NAVAL BATTLES BETWEEN THE WAGANDA
     AND THE WAVUMA, IN THE CHANNEL BETWEEN INGIRA ISLAND AND CAPE
     NAKARANGA.]

     "The Wavuma, seeing matters approaching a crisis, and not wishing
     to die tamely, manned their canoes, and one hundred and ninety-six
     dashed impetuously, as at first, from the rushes of Ingira with
     loud, shrill yells, and the Waganda lines moved backward to the
     centre of the channel, where they bravely and coolly maintained
     their position. As the centre of the Uganda line parted in front of
     the causeway and disclosed the hotly advancing enemy, Tori aimed
     the howitzers and fired at a group of about twenty canoes,
     completely shattering more than half of them, and, reloading one
     quickly, he discharged several bolts of iron three inches long
     among them with terrible effect. Before this cool bearing of the
     Waganda the Wavuma retired to their island again, and we saw
     numbers of canoes discharging their dead and wounded, and the
     Waganda were summoned to Nakaranga shore to receive the
     congratulations of the emperor and the applause of the vast
     multitude. Mtesa went down to the water's edge to express his
     satisfaction at their behavior.

     [Illustration: SMALL CANOE.]

     "'Go at them again,' said he, 'and show them what fighting is.' And
     the line of battle was again formed, and again the Wavuma darted
     from the cover of the reeds and water-cane with the swiftness of
     hungry sharks, beating the water into foam with their paddles, and
     rending the air with their piercing yells. It was one of the most
     exciting and animating scenes I ever beheld. The Waganda
     distinguished themselves for coolness and method, and the Wavuma,
     as on a former occasion, for intrepidity and desperate courage."

[Illustration: VIEW OF THE COUNTRY NEAR MTESA'S CAMP.]

"Mtesa did not make any progress in his war upon the Wavuma," said Fred,
"and became very ill-natured in consequence. One day he captured a
Wavuma chief, whom he proposed to burn to death. The man was bound to a
stake, and fagots were piled around him ready to be lighted, when
Stanley interfered. With great difficulty, and only upon the threat of
going away immediately, he succeeded in persuading Mtesa not to carry
out his intention. Mtesa had repeatedly asked Stanley's advice and
assistance. Stanley was anxious to end the war, and continue his
journey, and at the same time he wished to prevent bloodshed. So he
proposed to the king that in return for granting his request to spare
the life of the Wavuma chief he would build something that would strike
terror to the Wavuma and force them to submit. Let us hear his story of
what he did:

     "'You must give me plenty of men to help me, and in three days I
     shall be ready,' I said to Mtesa. 'Meantime shout out to the Wavuma
     from the causeway that you have something which will be so terrible
     that it will finish the war at once.'

     "'Take everybody, do anything you like; I will give you Sekebobo
     and all his men.'

     "The next morning Sekebobo brought about two thousand men before my
     quarters, and requested to know my will. I told him to despatch one
     thousand men to cut long poles one inch thick, three hundred to cut
     poles three inches thick and seven feet long, one hundred to cut
     straight long trees four inches thick, and one hundred to disbark
     all these and make bark rope. Himself and five hundred men I wished
     to assist me at the beach. The chief communicated my instructions
     and urged them to be speedy, as it was the emperor's command, and
     himself accompanied me to the canoe fleet.

     "I selected three of the strongest-built canoes, each seventy feet
     long and six and a half feet wide, and, after preparing a space of
     ground near the water's edge, had them drawn up parallel with one
     another, and four feet apart from each other. With these three
     canoes I began to construct a floating platform, laying the tall
     trees across the canoes, and lashing them firmly to the thwarts,
     and as fast as the seven-foot poles came I had them lashed in an
     upright position to the thwarts of the outer canoes, and as fast as
     the inch poles arrived I had them twisted in among these uprights,
     so that when completed it resembled an oblong stockade, seventy
     feet long by twenty-seven feet wide, which the spears of the enemy
     could not penetrate.

     [Illustration: THE FLOATING FORTLET MOVING TOWARDS INGIRA.]

     "On the afternoon of the second day the floating fort was finished,
     and Mtesa and his chiefs came down to the beach to see it launched
     and navigated for a trial trip. The chiefs, when they saw it, began
     to say it would sink, and communicated their fears to Mtesa, who
     half believed them. But the emperor's women said to him: 'Leave
     Stamlee alone; he would not make such a thing if he did not know
     that it would float.'

     "On receiving orders to launch it, I selected sixty paddlers, and
     one hundred and fifty musketeers of the body-guard to stand by to
     embark as soon as it should be afloat, and appointed Tori and one
     of my own best men to superintend its navigation, and told them to
     close the gate of the fort as soon as they pushed off from the
     land. About one thousand men were then set to work to launch it,
     and soon it was floating in the water, and when the crew and
     garrison, two hundred and fourteen souls, were in it, it was
     evident to all that it rode the waves of the lake easily and
     safely--

  "'The invention all admired, and each how he
  To be the inventor missed, so easy it seemed
  Once found, which yet unfound most would have thought
  Impossible'--

     "and a burst of applause from the army rewarded the inventor.

     "Several long blue Kaniki and white and red cloths were hoisted
     above this curious structure, which, when closed up all round,
     appeared to move of its own accord in a very mysterious manner, and
     to conceal within its silent and impenetrable walls some dread
     thing, well calculated to strike terror into the mind of the
     ignorant savage.

     "At eight o'clock, on the morning of the 13th of October, the army
     was assembled at Nakaranga with unusual display, and it was
     proclaimed across the strait from the extremity of the causeway,
     that a terrible thing was approaching which would blow them into
     atoms if they did not make peace at once, and acknowledge the power
     of Mtesa; and I believe that they declared that all the Muzimus and
     the charms of Uganda were within, for I heard something said about
     Muzimu and Uganda. The old Mvuma chief was also placed in prominent
     view, and induced to urge them to accept the terms which Mtesa
     offered, viz., pardon to all, provided they went through the form
     of submission. After this announcement, which was made with all
     gravity, the awful mysterious structure appeared, while the drums
     beat a tremendous sound, and the multitude of horns blew a
     deafening blast.

     "It was a moment of anxiety to me, for manifold reasons. The fort,
     perfectly defensible in itself against the most furious assaults by
     men armed with spears, steadily approached the point, then steered
     direct for the island of Ingira, until it was within fifty yards.

     "'Speak,' said a stentorian voice, amid a deathly silence within.
     'What will you do? Will you make peace and submit to Mtesa, or
     shall we blow up the island? Be quick and answer.'

     "There was a moment's consultation among the awe-stricken Wavuma.
     Immediate decision was imperative. The structure was vast, totally
     unlike anything that was ever visible on the waters of their sea.
     There was no person visible, yet a voice spoke clear and loud. Was
     it a spirit, the Wazimu of all Uganda, more propitious to their
     enemy's prayers than those of the Wavuma? It might contain some
     devilish, awful thing, something similar to the evil spirits which
     in their hours of melancholy and gloom their imagination invoked.
     There was an audacity and confidence in its movements that was
     perfectly appalling.

     "'Speak,' repeated the stern voice; 'we cannot wait longer.'

     "Immediately, to our relief, a man, evidently a chief, answered,
     'Enough; let Mtesa be satisfied. We will collect the tribute
     to-day, and will come to Mtesa. Return, O spirit, the war is
     ended!' At which the mysterious structure solemnly began its return
     back to the cove where it had been constructed, and the quarter of
     a million of savage human beings, spectators of the extraordinary
     scene, gave a shout that seemed to split the very sky, and Ingira's
     bold height repeated the shock of sound back to Nakaranga.

     [Illustration: UGANDA WAR CANOE.]

     "Three hours afterwards, a canoe came from Ingira Island, bearing
     fifty men, some of whom were chiefs. They brought with them several
     tusks of ivory, which were delivered over to the charge of the
     steward. The old Mvuma chief was surrendered to his tribe, and thus
     the long war terminated on the evening of the 13th of October,
     1875.

     "Glad shouts from both sides announced all parties equally pleased.
     The same afternoon, the canoe fleet of Uganda, which had by this
     time been reduced to two hundred and seventy-five in number, was
     escorted as far as Jinja by twenty Wavuma canoes, and after it had
     departed and rounded Namagongo Point, releasing their late foe from
     all fear of treachery, the Wavuma canoes presented us with a
     peaceful exhibition of their dexterity, and gave us an opportunity
     of viewing them more distinctly than we had previously been able to
     do through the smoke of gunpowder."

[Illustration: WANGWANA HUT IN CAMP.]

"As soon as peace was declared," said Fred, after a pause, "the king
returned to his capital, and the army was dispersed. Mr. Stanley
accompanied the king, and, after resting a few days, reminded Mtesa of
his promise to give him a powerful escort to take the expedition to the
Muta Nzege, a lake lying to the south of Albert Lake, and about two
hundred miles west of Victoria Lake. Mtesa did as he had agreed, and
sent an escort of about two thousand warriors under command of a
general named Sambuzi. Escorted by several war-canoes, Stanley went to
Dumo, where his camp had been established during the time the leader was
absent with Mtesa in the war against the Wavuma. Frank Pocock had
remained at the camp, and Stanley was greatly pleased to find everything
in order and his men in excellent condition.

[Illustration: HUT AT JINJA.]

"The men had built comfortable huts and were abundantly supplied with
food. The natives all around them were friendly in obedience to the
orders they received from the king; altogether the Zanzibaris were
having such a good time that they were in no hurry to leave.

[Illustration: HEAD OF CENTRAL AFRICAN HARTEBEEST.]

"On the seventh day after his return to Dumo, Stanley began his march
towards the Katonga River, where he was to meet the Waganda escort under
Sambuzi for the journey to Muta Nzege. He was obliged to halt several
days at a place called Kikoma to wait for Sambuzi; the country was full
of wild animals, and Stanley took advantage of the halt to shoot game to
supply meat for the expedition. In five days he killed fifty-seven
hartebeest, two zebra, and one water-buck. Lions and leopards were said
to be abundant, but he did not get a shot at them.

[Illustration: THE CAMP OF THE EXPEDITION.]

"On New Year's day, 1876, the expedition crossed the boundary between
Uganda and Unyoro. The king of the latter country was at war with the
Egyptians who had established themselves on Albert Lake, and it was very
soon evident that he would oppose the invasion of his territory by
Stanley's expedition. Mr. Stanley sent out scouts to ascertain the state
of affairs, and their interviews with the natives showed that the latter
intended to fight. A mission to the king failed to secure permission to
proceed, but during the time required for the mission Stanley had
reached a point only a few miles from the lake.

"Much of the country on the line of march was rough and picturesque, and
Mr. Stanley names it the Switzerland of Africa. Mount Edwin Arnold is
near the site of one of the camps of the expedition; it is estimated to
be nine thousand feet above the level of the sea.

[Illustration: MOUNT EDWIN ARNOLD.]

"The courage of the Waganda disappeared when there was a prospect of
fighting, and in spite of all the arguments which Mr. Stanley advanced
they determined to return to their own country. He reached the shore of
the lake, but finding the king bent upon war, and the Waganda refusing
to remain with him, he was forced to leave without making the desired
exploration. He was bitterly disappointed at the failure of this part of
his expedition, but there was no help for it."

"Did he go back to King Mtesa's capital," asked one of the listeners,
"or continue his journey another way?"

[Illustration: MARCHING TOWARDS MUTA NZEGE: MOUNT GORDON-BENNETT IN THE
DISTANCE.]

"He went to the frontier of Uganda, but not to the capital," replied
Fred. "There he parted with Sambuzi and decided to travel southward to
Lake Tanganika with no other escort than his own men. Mtesa sent to him
the offer of an escort of fifty thousand or one hundred thousand men to
Muta Nzege, but after his experiences with Waganda soldiers he declined
the offer with many thanks, and presents of cloth, beads, and other
valuable things. Then he marched southward into KaragwÃ©, the country of
King Rumanika, where he was hospitably received. Here is his account of
his reception:

[Illustration: GRASS-ROOFED HUT, UNYORO.]

[Illustration: NATIVE HUT, KARAGWÃ‰.]

     "On the 25th of February we entered the Arab depot of Kafurro, in
     KaragwÃ©. The place owes its importance to being a settlement of two
     or three rich Arab traders, Hamed Ibrahim, Sayid bin Sayf, and
     Sayid the Muscati. It is situated within a deep hollow or valley
     fully twelve hundred feet below the tops of the surrounding
     mountains, and at the spring source of a stream flowing east and
     afterwards north to the Alexandra Nile.

     "Hamed Ibrahim is rich in cattle, slaves, and ivory. Assuming his
     own figures to be correct, he possesses one hundred and fifty
     cattle, bullocks, and milch cows, forty goats, one hundred slaves,
     and four hundred and fifty tusks of ivory, the greater part of
     which last is reported to be safely housed in the safe-keeping of
     his friend the chief of Urangwa in Unyamwezi.

     "Hamed has a spacious and comfortable gable-roofed house. He is a
     fine, gentlemanly-looking Arab, of a light complexion, generous and
     hospitable to friends, liberal to his slaves, and kind to
     everybody. He has lived eighteen years in Africa, twelve of which
     have been spent in KaragwÃ©. He knew Suna, the warlike Emperor of
     Uganda, and father of Mtesa. He has travelled to Uganda frequently,
     and several times made the journey between UnyanyembÃ© and Kafurro.
     Having lived so long in KaragwÃ©, he is friendly with Rumanika, who,
     like Mtesa, loves to attract strangers to his court.

     [Illustration: VIEW NEAR KAFURRO.]

     "Hamed has endeavored several times to open trade with the powerful
     Empress of Ruanda, but has each time failed. Though some of his
     slaves succeeded in reaching the imperial court, only one or two
     managed to effect their escape from the treachery and
     extraordinary guile practised there. Nearly all perished by poison.

     [Illustration: CENTRAL AFRICAN ANTELOPE, KARAGWÃ‰.]

     "'All these people,' said he, 'about here are as different from the
     ordinary Washensi--pagans--as I am different from them. When you go
     to see Rumanika, you will see some Wanya-Ruanda, and you may then
     judge for yourself. The people of that country are not cowards.
     They have taken Kishakka, Muvari, and have lately conquered
     Mpororo. The Waganda measured their strength with them, and were
     obliged to retreat. The Wanya-Ruanda are a great people, but they
     are covetous, malignant, treacherous, and utterly untrustworthy.
     They have never yet allowed an Arab to trade in their country,
     which proves them to be a bad lot. There is plenty of ivory there,
     and during the last eight years Khamis bin Abdullah, Tippu-Tib,
     Sayid bin Habib, and I myself have attempted frequently to enter
     there, but none of us has ever succeeded. Even Rumanika's people
     are not allowed to penetrate far, though he permits everybody to
     come into his country, and he is a man of their own blood and their
     own race, and speaks with little difference their own language.'

     "Hamed Ibrahim was not opening out very brilliant prospects before
     me, nevertheless I resolved to search out in person some known road
     to this strange country that I might make a direct course to
     NyangwÃ©.

     "On the third day after arrival, the king having been informed of
     my intended visit, Hamed Ibrahim and Sayid bin Sayf accompanied me
     on an official visit to Rumanika, King of KaragwÃ©, and a tributary
     of Mtesa, Emperor of Uganda.

     "Kafurro, according to aneroid barometer, is 3950 feet above the
     ocean. Ascending the steep slope of the mountain west of Kafurro,
     we gained an altitude of 5150 feet, and half an hour afterwards
     stood upon a ridge 5350 feet above the sea, whence we obtained a
     most grand and imposing view. Some six hundred feet below us was a
     grassy terrace overlooking the small Windermere Lake, one thousand
     feet below, its placid surface rivalling in color the azure of the
     cloudless heaven. Across a narrow ridge we looked upon the broad
     and papyrus-covered valley of the Alexandra, while many fair blue
     lakelets north and south, connected by the winding silver line of
     the Alexandra Nile, suggested that here exploring work of a most
     interesting character was needed to understand the complete
     relations of lake, river, and valley to one another.

     "Beyond the broad valley rose ridge after ridge, separated from
     each other by deep parallel basins or valleys, and behind these,
     receding into dim and vague outlines, towered loftier ridges. About
     sixty miles off, to the northwest, rose a colossal sugar-loaf clump
     of enormous altitude, which I was told was the Ufumbiro Mountains.
     From their northern base extended Mpororo country and South Ruanda.

     [Illustration: VIEW OF UFUMBIRO MOUNTAINS FROM MOUNT NEAR MTAGATA
     HOT SPRINGS.]

     "On the grassy terrace below us was situated Rumanika's village,
     fenced round by a strong and circular stockade, to which we now
     descended after having enjoyed a noble and inspiriting prospect.

     "Our procession was not long in attracting hundreds of persons,
     principally youths, all the latter being perfectly nude.

     "'Who are these?' I inquired of Sheik Hamed.

     "'Some of the youngest are sons of Rumanika, others are young
     Wanya-Ruanda,' he replied.

     "The sons of Rumanika, nourished on a milk diet, were in remarkably
     good condition. Their unctuous skins shone as though the tissues of
     fat beneath were dissolving in the heat, and their rounded bodies
     were as taut as a drum-head. Their eyes were large, and beaming and
     lustrous with life, yet softened by an extreme gentleness of
     expression. The sculptor might have obtained from any of these
     royal boys a dark model for another statue to rival the classic
     Antinous.

     "As we were followed by the youths, who welcomed us with a graceful
     courtesy, the appropriate couplet came to my mind--

  "Thrice happy race! that, innocent of blood,
  From milk innoxious seek their simple food."

     "We were soon ushered into the hut wherein Rumanika sat expectant,
     with one of the kindliest, most paternal smiles it would be
     possible to conceive.

     [Illustration: RUMANIKA'S TREASURE-HOUSE.]

     "I confess to have been as affected by the first glance at this
     venerable and gentle pagan as though I gazed on the serene and
     placid face of some Christian patriarch or saint of old, whose
     memory the Church still holds in reverence. His face reminded me of
     a deep, still well; the tones of his voice were so calm that,
     unconsciously, they compelled me to imitate him, while the quick,
     nervous gestures and the bold voice of Sheik Hamed, seeming
     entirely out of place, jarred upon me.

     "It was no wonder that the peremptory and imperious, vivid-eyed
     Mtesa respected and loved this sweet-tempered pagan. Though they
     had never met, Mtesa's pages had described him, and with their
     powers of mimicry had brought the soft, modulated tones of Rumanika
     to his ears as truly as they had borne his amicable messages to
     him.

     "Nature, which had endowed Mtesa with a nervous and intense
     temperament, had given Rumanika the placid temper, the soft voice,
     the mild benignity, and pleasing character of a gentle father.

     "The king appeared to me, clad as he was in red blanket-cloth, when
     seated, a man of middle size; but when he afterwards stood up he
     rose to the gigantic stature of six feet six inches, or
     thereabouts, for the top of my head, as we walked side by side,
     only reached near his shoulders. His face was long, and his nose
     somewhat Roman in shape; the profile showed a decidedly refined
     type.

     "Our interview was very pleasing, and he took excessive interest in
     every question I addressed to him. When I spoke he imposed silence
     on his friends, and leaned forward with eager attention. If I
     wished to know anything about the geography of the country, he
     immediately sent for some particular person who was acquainted
     with that portion, and inquired searchingly of him as to his
     knowledge. He chuckled when he saw me use my note-book, as though
     he had some large personal interest in the number of notes I took.
     He appeared to be more and more delighted as their bulk increased,
     and triumphantly pointed out to the Arabs the immense superiority
     of the whites to them.

     [Illustration: A SPEARMAN OF KARAGWÃ‰.]

     "He expressed himself as only too glad that I should explore his
     country. It was a land, he said, that white men ought to know. It
     possessed many lakes and rivers, and mountains and hot springs, and
     many other things which no other country could boast of.

     "'Which do you think best, Stamlee--KaragwÃ© or Uganda?'

     "'KaragwÃ© is grand; its mountains are high, and its valleys deep.
     The Kagera is a grand river, and the lakes are very pretty. There
     are more cattle in KaragwÃ© than in Uganda, except Uddu and Koki;
     and game is abundant. But Uganda is beautiful and rich; its banana
     plantations are forests, and no man need to fear starvation, and
     Mtesa is good--and so is Father Rumanika,' I replied, smiling, to
     him.

     [Illustration: MOUNTAIN SCENE IN KARAGWÃ‰.]

     "'Do you hear him, Arabs? Does he not speak well? Yes, KaragwÃ© is
     beautiful,' he sighed, contentedly. 'But bring your boat up, and
     place it on the Rweru (lake), and you can go up the river as far as
     Kishakka, and down to Morongo (the falls), where the water is
     thrown against a big rock and leaps over it, and then goes down to
     the Nianja of Uganda. Verily, my river is a great one; it is the
     mother of the river at Jinja (Ripon Falls).'

     [Illustration: BOAT ON LAKE WINDERMERE.]

     "By the 6th of March Frank had launched the boat from the landing
     at Kazinga village, on the waters of the Windermere Lake,[6] or the
     Rweru of Rumanika, and the next day Rumanika accompanied me in
     state to the water. Half a dozen heavy anklets of bright copper
     adorned his legs, bangles of the same metal encircled his wrists,
     and a robe of crimson flannel was suspended from his shoulders. His
     walking-staff was seven feet in length, and his stride was a yard
     long. Drummers and fifers discoursing a wild music, and fifty
     spearmen, besides his sons and relatives, Wanya-Ruanda, Waganda,
     Wasui, Wanyamwezi, Arabs, and Wangwana, followed us in a mixed
     multitude.

     [6] This lake received its name from Captain Speke, because Colonel
     Grant, his companion, thought it resembled the Windermere Lake in
     England.

     "Four canoes, manned by Wamyambu, were at hand to race with our
     boat, while we took our seats on the grassy slopes of Kazinga to
     view the scene. I enjoined Frank and the gallant boat's crew to
     exert themselves for the honor of us Children of the Ocean, and not
     to permit the Children of the Lakes to excel us.

     "A boat and canoe race on the Windermere of KaragwÃ©, with twelve
     hundred gentle-mannered natives gazing on! An African international
     affair! Rumanika was in his element; every fibre of him tingled
     with joy at the prospective fun. His sons, seated around him,
     looked up into their father's face, their own reflecting his
     delight. The curious natives shared in the general gratification.

     "The boat-race was soon over; it was only for about eight hundred
     yards, to Kankorogo Point. There was not much difference in the
     speed, but it gave immense satisfaction. The native canoe-men,
     standing up with their long paddles, strained themselves with all
     their energy, stimulated by the shouts of their countrymen, while
     the Wangwana on the shore urged the boat's crew to their utmost
     power.

     "The next day we began the circumnavigation of the Windermere. The
     extreme length of the lake during the rainy season is about eight
     miles, and its extreme breadth two and a half. It lies north and
     south, surrounded by grass-covered mountains, which rise from
     twelve hundred to fifteen hundred feet above it. There is one
     island, called Kankorogo, situated midway between Mount Isossi and
     the extreme southern end. The soil of the shores is highly
     ferruginous in color, and, except in the vicinity of the villages,
     produces only euphorbia, thorny gum, acacia, and aloetic plants.

     "On the 9th we pulled abreast of Kankorogo Island, and, through a
     channel from five hundred to eight hundred yards wide, directed our
     course to the Kagera, up which we had to contend against a current
     of two knots and a half an hour.

     "The breadth of the river varied from fifty to one hundred yards.
     The average depth of all the ten soundings we made on this day was
     fifty-two feet along the middle; close to the papyrus walls, which
     grew like a forest above us, was a depth of nine feet. Sometimes we
     caught a view of hippopotamus creeks running up for hundreds of
     yards on either side through the papyrus. At Kagayyo, on the left
     bank, we landed for a short time to take a view of the scene
     around, as, while in the river, we could see nothing except the
     papyrus, the tops of the mountain ridges of KaragwÃ©, and the sky.

     "We then learned for the first time the true character of what we
     had imagined to be a valley when we gazed upon it from the summit
     of the mountain between Kafurro and Rumanika's capital.

     [Illustration: KAGERA SKIFF.]

     "The Ingezi, as the natives called it, embraces the whole space
     from the base of the Mountains of Muvari to that of the KaragwÃ©
     ridges with the river called Kagera, the Funzo or the papyrus, and
     the Rwerus or lakes, of which there are seventeen, inclusive of
     Windermere. Its extreme width between the bases of the opposing
     mountains is nine miles; the narrowest part is about a mile, while
     the entire acreage covered by it from Morongo or the falls in
     Iwanda, north, to Uhimba, south, is about three hundred and fifty
     square miles. The Funzo or papyrus covers a depth of from nine feet
     to fourteen feet of water. Each of the several lakes has a depth of
     from twenty to sixty-five feet, and they are all connected, as also
     is the river, underneath the papyrus.

     "When about three miles north of Kizinga, at 5 P.M., we drew our
     boat close to the papyrus, and prepared for our night's rest, and
     the Wanyambu did the same.

     [Illustration: NATIVE WOMAN OF FASHION.]

     "The boat's crew crushed down some of the serest papyrus, and,
     cutting off the broom-like tops, spread their mats upon the heap
     thus made, flattering themselves that they were going to have a
     cosey night of it. Their fires they kindled between three stalks,
     which sustained their cooking-pots. It was not a very successful
     method, as the stalks had to be replaced frequently; but, finally,
     their bananas were done to a turn. At night, however, mosquitoes of
     a most voracious species attacked them in dense multitudes, and
     nothing but the constant flip-flap of the papyrus tops, mingled
     with complaints that they were unable to sleep, were heard for an
     hour or two. They then began to feel damp, and finally wet, for
     their beds were sinking into the depths below the papyrus, and they
     were compelled at last to come into the boat, where they passed a
     most miserable night, for the mosquitoes swarmed and attacked them
     until morning with all the pertinacity characteristic of these
     hungry blood-suckers.

     "The next day we ascended the Kagera about ten miles, and,
     returning fourteen miles, entered Ihema Lake, a body of water about
     fifty square miles, and camped on Ihema Island, about a mile from
     Muvari.

     [Illustration: IHEMA HUT.]

     "The natives of Ihema Island stated to me that Lake Muta Nzege was
     only eleven days' journey from the Muvari shores, and that the
     Wanya-Ruanda frequently visited them to obtain fish in exchange for
     milk and vegetables. They were a genial people, those islanders of
     Ihema, but they were subject to two painful diseases, leprosy and
     elephantiasis. The water of the Lake Ihema was good and sweet to
     the taste, though, like all the waters of the Alexandra Nile,
     distinguished for its dull, brown, iron color.

     "We began from the extreme south end of the lake the next day to
     coast along the Muvari or Ruanda coast, and near a small village
     attempted to land, but the natives snarled like so many spiteful
     dogs, and drew their bows, which compelled us--being guests of
     Rumanika--to sheer off, and leave them in their ferocious
     exclusiveness.

     [Illustration: A NATIVE OF UHHA.]

     "On the 11th we rowed into the Kagera, and descended the river as
     far as Ugoi, and on the evening of the 12th returned once more to
     our camp on Windermere."

[Illustration: BOAT ON LAKE IHEMA.]

Here Fred regarded his watch, and said he would adjourn the reading
until next day, when his place would be taken by Frank. The usual vote
of thanks was passed unanimously, and then the little band of
geographical students separated for the night.

[Illustration: HUT OF UGANDA. SMALL TEMBÃ‰ OF UGOGO.]




CHAPTER VI.

STANLEY TELLS ABOUT KING RUMANIKA.--THE KARAGWÃ‰ GEOGRAPHICAL
SOCIETY.--THE KING'S TREASURE-HOUSE.--GOOD-BYE TO HIS
MAJESTY.--HOSTILITY BETWEEN ELEPHANT AND RHINOCEROS.--PLUNDERED IN
USUI.--THE SOURCES OF THE ALEXANDRA NILE.--RETROSPECTION.--QUESTIONS OF
TOPOGRAPHY.--INSOLENCE OF MANKORONGO.--DEATH OF "BULL."--TROUBLES WITH
THE PETTY KINGS.--INTERVIEW WITH THE FAMOUS MIRAMBO.--GENERAL APPEARANCE
OF THE RENOWNED AFRICAN.--AN IMPOSING CEREMONY.--BLOOD-BROTHERHOOD.--HOW
GRANT'S CARAVAN WAS PLUNDERED.--MYONGA'S THREATS.--A COMPROMISE.--AMONG
THE WATUTA.--IN SIGHT OF LAKE TANGANIKA.--ARRIVAL AT UJIJI.


During all the forenoon of the following day Frank was busy preparing
his matter for the work of the afternoon. When the party of youths had
assembled Mr. Stanley came among them and asked at what point in the
story of the Dark Continent they stopped on the previous evening.

"We were in the country of King Rumanika, I believe it is called
KaragwÃ©," said one of the auditors; "and you had just returned from
exploring Lake Windermere."

[Illustration: HOUSE OF ARAB MERCHANT NEAR RUMANIKA'S VILLAGE.]

"Ah, yes," replied Mr. Stanley, "he was a charming old man, that
Rumanika, and very fond of strangers. After I had explored the lake he
sent for me, and wanted to have a talk on geographical subjects. Of
course I went to meet him."

"Did he know anything about geography outside of his own country?" was
the very natural inquiry of Fred.

"Not much," was the reply; "and what he did know was very hazy. But he
pretended to know a great deal about Africa, and gave me some startling
information, which I gravely put down in my note-book. The sight of that
note-book always seemed to inspire him to tell the wildest stories about
his country, and I presume he thought I would spread them before my
countrymen as the most solemn truths.

"For example," continued Mr. Stanley, "he said at one of our meetings:

     "'Mkinyaga is at the end of Ruanda, and its lake is Muta Nzege, on
     which you can go to Unyoro. There is a race of dwarfs, somewhere
     west of Mkinyaga, called the Mpundu, and another called the Batwa,
     or Watwa, who are only two feet high. In Uriambwa is a race of
     small people with tails.

     "'Uitwa, or Batwa--Watwa--is at the extreme south end of Uzongora.

     "'From Butwa, at the end of a point of land in Ruanda, you can see
     Uitwa Usongora.

     "'From Butwa, Mkinyaga is to the left of you about three days'
     journey.

     [Illustration: ON THE WAY TO THE MEETING.]

     "'Some of the Waziwa saw a strange people in one of those far-off
     lands who had long ears descending to their feet; one ear formed a
     mat to sleep on, the other served to cover him from the cold, like
     a dressed hide! They tried to coax one of them to come and see me,
     but the journey was long, and he died on the way.'

"Another time he said:

     "'Stamlee, how is it, will you tell me, that all white men have
     long noses, and all their dogs have very short noses, while almost
     all black men have short noses but their dogs have very long
     noses?'

"He had observed the broad, short nose of my British bull-dog, and
hastily arrived at the conclusion that all white men's dogs were
pug-nosed.

[Illustration: GROUND-PLAN OF KING'S HOUSE.]

"Rumanika propounded a great many other questions, which I answered to
the best of my ability, and generally to his satisfaction. I was
somewhat puzzled about his question regarding the noses, but finally
explained that originally the white men and their dogs had noses of the
same length. The men had lengthened theirs by constantly smelling the
good things they had to eat, while the dogs had shortened their noses by
using them to push open the doors of the houses.

"Another day," continued Mr. Stanley, quoting from his work:

     "Rumanika requested Hamed Ibrahim to exhibit the treasures,
     trophies, and curiosities in the king's museum or armory, which
     Hamed was most anxious to do, as he had frequently extolled the
     rare things there.

     "The armory was a circular hut, resembling externally a dome,
     thatched neatly with straw. It was about thirty feet in diameter.

     "The weapons and articles of brass, and copper, and iron, were in
     perfect order, and showed that Rumanika did not neglect his
     treasures.

     [Illustration: TREASURE-HOUSE, ARMS, AND TREASURES OF RUMANIKA.]

     "There were about sixteen rude brass figures of ducks with copper
     wings, ten curious things of the same metal, which were meant to
     represent elands, and ten headless cows of copper. Bill-hooks of
     iron, of really admirable make, double-bladed spears, several
     gigantic blades of exceedingly keen edge, eight inches across and
     eighteen inches in length; exquisite spears, some with blades and
     staves of linked iron; others with chain-shaped staves, and several
     with a cluster of small rigid rings massed at the bottom of the
     blade and the end of the staff; others, copper-bladed, had curious
     inter-twisted iron rods for the staff. There were also great
     fly-flaps set in iron, the handles of which were admirable
     specimens of native art; massive cleaver-looking knives, with
     polished blades, and a kedge-anchor-shaped article with four hooked
     iron prongs, projecting out of a brass body. Some exquisite native
     cloths, manufactured of delicate grass, were indeed so fine as to
     vie with cotton sheeting, and were colored black and red, in
     patterns and stripes. The royal stool was a masterpiece of native
     turnery, being carved out of a solid log of cottonwood. Besides
     these specimens of native art were drinking-cups, goblets,
     trenchers, and milk-dishes of wood, all beautifully clean. The
     fireplace was a circular hearth in the centre of the building, very
     tastefully constructed. Ranged round the wall along the floor were
     other gifts from Arab friends, massive copper trays, with a few
     tureen-lids of Britannia-ware, evidently from Birmingham. Nor must
     the revolving rifle given to him by Captain Speke be forgotten, for
     it had an honored place, and Rumanika loves to look at it, for it
     recalls to his memory the figures of his genial white friends,
     Speke and Grant.

     "The enormous drums, fifty-two in number, ranged outside, enabled
     us, from their very appearance, to guess at the deafening sounds
     which celebrate the new moon or deliver the signals for war.

     "My parting with the genial old man was very affecting. He shook my
     hands many times, saying each time that he was sorry that my visit
     must be so short. He strictly charged his sons to pay me every
     attention until I should arrive at Kibogora's, the king of western
     Usui, who, he was satisfied, would be glad to see me as a friend of
     Rumanika.

     "On the 26th of March the expedition, after its month's rest at
     Kafurro, the whole of which period I had spent in exploration of
     western KaragwÃ©, resumed its journey, and after a march of five
     miles camped at Nakawanga, near the southern base of Kibonga
     Mountain.

     "On the 27th I had the good-fortune to shoot three rhinoceroses,
     from the bodies of which we obtained ample supplies of meat for our
     journey through the wilderness of Uhimba. One of these enormous
     brutes possessed a horn two feet long, with a sharp, dagger-like
     point below a stunted horn, nine inches in length. He appeared to
     have had a tussle with some wild beast, for a hand's-breadth of
     hide was torn from his rump.

     "The Wangwana and Wanyambu informed me, with the utmost gravity,
     that the elephant maltreats the rhinoceros frequently, because of a
     jealousy that the former entertains of his fiery cousin.

     "Should a rhinoceros meet an elephant he must observe the rule of
     the road, and walk away, for the latter brooks no rivalry; but the
     former is sometimes head-strong, and the elephant then despatches
     him with his tusks by forcing him against a tree and goring him, or
     by upsetting him, and leisurely crushing him.

     "During the next two days we travelled twenty-seven miles south
     through a depression, or a longitudinal valley, parallel to Uhimba
     Lake and the course of the Alexandra, with only an intervening
     ridge excluding the latter from our view. Tall, truncated
     hill-cones rise every now and then, with a singular resemblance to
     each other, to the same altitude as the grassy ridges which flank
     them. Their summits are flat, but the iron-stone faithfully
     indicates by its erosions the element which separated them from the
     ridges, and first furrowed the valley.

"And now," said Mr. Stanley, "having told you about King Rumanika, and
how I left him, I will lapse into silence and let you hear from Frank."

With this hint, Frank opened the volume before him and read:

[Illustration: THE EXPEDITION TRAVERSING THE VALLEY.]

     "Uhimba, placed by Rumanika in the charge of his sons, Kakoko,
     Kananga, and Ruhinda, is sixty-eight miles south of his capital,
     and consists of a few settlements of herdsmen. I was courteously
     received by Kakoko, and remained there two days. The next day we
     entered western Usui, and camped at Kafurra's. In Usui there was a
     famine, and it required thirty-two doti of cloth to purchase four
     days' rations. Kibogora, King of Usui, demanded and obtained thirty
     doti, one coil of wire, and forty necklaces of beads as tribute;
     Kafurra, his principal chief, demanded ten doti and a quantity of
     beads; another chief required five doti; the queen required a
     supply of cloth to wear; the princes put in a claim; the guides
     were loud for their reward. Thus in four days we were compelled to
     disburse two bales out of twenty-two--all that were left of the
     immense store we had departed with from Zanzibar. Under such
     circumstances what prospect of exploration had we? Were we to
     continue our journey through Uhha, that land which, in 1871, had
     consumed at the rate of two bales of cloth per diem? Twenty days of
     such experience in Uhha would reduce us to beggary. Its 'esurient'
     MutwarÃ©s and rapacious Mkamas and other extortionate people can
     only be quieted with cloth and beads disbursed with a princely
     hand. One hundred bales of cloth would only suffice to sustain a
     hundred men in Uhha about six weeks. Beyond Uhha lay the
     impenetrable countries of Urundi and Ruanda, the inhabitants of
     which were hostile to strangers.

     [Illustration: POTTERY IN USUI.]

     "Kibogora and Kafurra were sufficiently explicit and amiably
     communicative, for my arrival in their country had been under the
     very best auspices, viz., an introduction from the gentle and
     beloved Rumanika.

     "I turned away with a sigh from the interesting land, but with a
     resolution gradually being intensified, that the third time I
     sought a road west, nothing should deter me.

     "On the 7th of April we reluctantly resumed our journey in a
     southerly direction, and travelled five miles along a ravine, at
     the bottom of which murmured the infant stream Lohugati. On coming
     to its source, we ascended a steep slope until we stood upon the
     summit of a grassy ridge at the height of five thousand six hundred
     feet by aneroid.

     "Not until we had descended about a mile to the valley of Uyagoma,
     did I recognize the importance of this ridge as the water-parting
     between one of the feeders of Lake Victoria and the source of the
     Malagarazi, the principal affluent of Lake Tanganika.

     "Though by striking across Uhha due west, or to the southwest, we
     should again have reached the Alexandra Nile and the affluents of
     the Alexandra Lake, our future course was destined never to cross
     another stream or rivulet that supplied the great river which flows
     through the land of Egypt into the Mediterranean Sea.

     "From the 17th of January, 1875, up to the 7th of April, 1876, we
     had been engaged in tracing the extreme southern sources of the
     Nile, from the marshy plains and cultivated uplands where they are
     born, down to the mighty reservoir called the Victoria Nyanza. We
     had circumnavigated the entire expanse; penetrated to every bay,
     inlet, and creek; become acquainted with almost every variety of
     wild human nature--the mild and placable, the ferocious and
     impracticably savage, the hospitable and the inhospitable, the
     generous-souled as well as the ungenerous; we had viewed their
     methods of war, and had witnessed them imbruing their hands in each
     other's blood with savage triumph and glee; we had been five times
     sufferers by their lust for war and murder, and had lost many men
     through their lawlessness and ferocity; we had travelled hundreds
     of miles to and fro on foot along the northern coast of the
     Victorian Sea, and, finally, had explored with a large force the
     strange countries lying between the two lakes Muta Nzege and the
     Victoria, and had been permitted to gaze upon the arm of the lake
     named by me 'Beatrice Gulf,' and to drink of its sweet waters. We
     had then returned from further quest in that direction, unable to
     find a peaceful resting-place on the lake shores, and had struck
     south from the Katonga lagoon down to the Alexandra Nile, the
     principal affluent of the Victoria Lake, which drains nearly all
     the waters from the west and southwest. We had made a patient
     survey of over one half of its course, and then, owing to want of
     the means to feed the rapacity of the churlish tribes which dwell
     in the vicinity of the Alexandra Nyanza, and to our reluctance to
     force our way against the will of the natives, opposing
     unnecessarily our rifles to their spears and arrows, we had been
     compelled, on the 7th of April, to bid adieu to the lands which
     supply the Nile, and to turn our faces towards the Tanganika.

     "I have endeavored to give a faithful portrayal of nature, animate
     and inanimate, in all its strange, peculiar phases, as they were
     unfolded to us. I am conscious that I have not penetrated to the
     depths; but then, I have not ventured beyond the limits assigned
     me, viz., the Exploration of the Southern Sources of the Nile, and
     the solution of the problem left unsolved by Speke and Grant--Is
     the Victoria Nyanza one lake, or does it consist of five lakes, as
     reported by Livingstone, Burton, and others? This problem has been
     satisfactorily solved, and Speke has now the full glory of having
     discovered the largest inland sea on the continent of Africa, also
     its principal affluent, as well as the outlet. I must also give him
     credit for having understood the geography of the countries he
     travelled through better than any of those who so persistently
     assailed his hypothesis, and I here record my admiration of the
     geographical genius that, from mere native report, first sketched
     with such a masterly hand the bold outlines of the Victoria Nyanza.
     Speke's hypothetic sketch made this lake twenty-nine thousand
     square miles in extent. My survey of it has reduced it to
     twenty-one thousand five hundred square miles.

     "Along the Valley of Uyagoma, in western Usui, stretches east and
     west a grass-covered ridge, beautiful in places with rock-strewn
     dingles, tapestried with ferns and moss, and bright with vivid
     foliage. From two such fair nooks, half-way down either slope, the
     northern and the southern, drip in great rich drops the sources of
     two impetuous rivers--on the southern the Malagarazi, on the other
     the Lohugati. Though nurtured in the same cradle, and issuing
     within two thousand yards of one another, the twin streams are
     strangers throughout their lives. Through the thick ferns and
     foliage the rivulets trickle each down his appointed slope,
     murmuring as they gather strength to run their destined course--the
     Lohugati to the Victoria Lake, and the Malagarazi to distant
     Tanganika.

     [Illustration: A VILLAGE IN WESTERN USUI.]

     "While the latter river is in its infancy, collecting its first
     tribute of waters from the rills that meander down from the
     mountain folds round the basin of Uyagoma, and is so shallow that
     tiny children can paddle through it, the people of Usui call it the
     Meruzi. When we begin our journey from Uyagoma, we follow its
     broadening course for a couple of hours, through the basin, and by
     that time it has become a river _nomine dignum_, and, plunging
     across it, we begin to breast the mountains, which, rising in
     diagonal lines of ridges from northeast to southwest across Usui,
     run in broken series into northern Uhha, and there lose themselves
     in a confusion of complicated masses and clumps.

     [Illustration: CAMP OF AN ARAB MERCHANT.]

     "The Meruzi wanders round and through these mountain masses in mazy
     curves, tumbles from height to height, from terrace to terrace,
     receiving as it goes the alliance of myriads of petty rivulets and
     threads of clear water, until, arriving at the grand forest lands
     of Unyamwezi, it has assumed the name of Lukoke, and serves as a
     boundary between Unyamwezi and Uhha.

     "Meanwhile, we have to cross a series of mountain ridges clothed
     with woods; and at a road leading from Kibogora's land to the
     territory of the turbulent and vindictive Mankorongo, we meet an
     embassy, which demands, in a most insolent tone, that we should
     pass by his village. This means, of course, that we must permit
     ourselves to be defrauded of two or three bales of cloth, half a
     dozen guns, a sack or two of beads, and such other property as he
     may choose to exact, for the privilege of lengthening our journey
     some forty miles, and a delay of two or three weeks.

     "The insolent demand is therefore not to be entertained, and we
     return a decided refusal. They are not satisfied with the answer,
     and resort to threats. Threats in the free, uninhabited forest
     constitute a _casus belli_. So the chiefs are compelled to depart
     without a yard of cloth on the instant, and after their departure
     we urge our pace until night, and from dawn next morning to 3 P.M.
     we continue the journey with unabated speed, until we find
     ourselves in Nyambarri, Usambiro, rejoiced to find that we have
     foiled the dangerous king.

     "On the 13th of April we halted to refresh the people. Usambiro,
     like all Unyamwezi, produces sufficient grain, sesamum, millet,
     Indian corn, and vetches, besides beans and pease, to supply all
     caravans and expeditions. I have observed that lands producing
     grain are more easy of access than pastoral countries, or those
     which only supply milk, bananas, and potatoes to their inhabitants.

     "At Nyambarri we met two Arab caravans fresh from Mankorongo, of
     whom they gave fearful accounts, from which I inferred that the
     extortionate chief would be by no means pleased when he came to
     understand how he had been baffled in his idea of spoliating our
     expedition.

     "During the march from Nyambarri to Gambawagao, the chief village
     of Usambiro, ancient "Bull," the last of all the canine companions
     which left England with me, borne down by weight of years and a
     land journey of about fifteen hundred miles, succumbed. With
     bull-dog tenacity he persisted in following the receding figures of
     the gun-bearers, who were accustomed to precede him in the narrow
     way. Though he often staggered and moaned, he made strenuous
     efforts to keep up, but at last, lying down in the path, he
     plaintively bemoaned the weakness of body that had conquered his
     will, and soon after died--his eyes to the last looking _forward_
     along the track he had so bravely tried to follow.

     [Illustration: "BULL."

     (_From a Photograph by Mr Stanley._)]

     "Poor dog! Good and faithful service had he done me! Who more
     rejoiced than he to hear the rifle-shot ringing through the deep
     woods! Who more loudly applauded success than he with his deep,
     mellow bark! What long forest-tracts of tawny plains, and series of
     mountain ranges had he not traversed! How he plunged through jungle
     and fen, morass and stream! In the sable blackness of the night his
     voice warned off marauders and prowling beasts from the sleeping
     camp. His growl responded to the hideous jabber of the greedy
     hyena, and the snarling leopard did not dismay him. He amazed the
     wondering savages with his bold eyes and bearing, and by his
     courageous front caused them to retreat before him; and right
     bravely did he help us to repel the Wanyaturu from our camp in
     Ituru. Farewell, thou glory of thy race! Rest from thy labors in
     the silent forest! Thy feet shall no more hurry up the hill or
     cross mead and plain; thy form shall rustle no more through the
     grasses, or be plunging to explore the brake; thou shalt no longer
     dash after me across the savannahs, for thou art gone to the grave,
     like the rest of thy companions!

     "The king of Usambiro exchanged gifts with us, and appeared to be a
     clever, agreeable young man. His people, though professing to be
     Wanyamwezi, are a mixture of Wahha and Wazinja. He has constructed
     a strong village, and surrounded it with a fosse four feet deep and
     six feet wide, with a stockade and 'marksmen's nests' at intervals
     round it. The population of the capital is about two thousand.

     "Boma Kiengo, or Msera, lies five miles south-southeast from the
     capital, and its chief, seeing that we had arrived at such a good
     understanding with the king, also exerted himself to create a
     favorable impression.

     "Musonga lies twelve miles south-southeast of Boma Kiengo, and is
     the most northerly village of the country of Urangwa. On the 18th
     of April a march of fifteen miles enabled us to reach the capital,
     Ndeverva, another large stockaded village, also provided with
     'marksmen's nests,' and surrounded by a fosse.

     "We were making capital marches. The petty kings, though they
     exacted a small interchange of gifts, which compelled me to
     disburse cloth a little more frequently than was absolutely
     necessary, were not insolent, nor so extortionate as to prevent
     our intercourse being of the most friendly character. But on the
     day we arrived at Urangwa, lo! there came up in haste, while we
     were sociably chatting together, a messenger to tell us that the
     phantom, the bugbear, the terror whose name silences the children
     of Unyamwezi and Usukuma, and makes women's hearts bound with fear,
     that Mirambo himself was coming--that he was only two camps, or
     about twenty miles, away--that he had an immense army of Ruga-Ruga
     (bandits) with him!

     "The consternation at this news, the dismay and excitement, the
     discussion and rapid interchange of ideas suggested by terror
     throughout the capital, may be conceived. Barricades were prepared,
     sharp-shooters' platforms, with thick bulwarks of logs, were
     erected. The women hastened to prepare their charms, the Waganda
     consulted their spirits, each warrior and elder examined his guns
     and loaded them, ramming the powder down the barrels of their
     Brummagem muskets with desperately vengeful intentions, while the
     king hastened backward and forward with streaming robes of cotton
     behind him, animated by an hysterical energy.

     "I had one hundred and seventy-five men under my command, and forty
     of the Arabs' people were with me, and we had many boxes of
     ammunition. The king recollected these facts, and said, 'You will
     stop to fight Mirambo, will you not?'

     "'Not I, my friend; I have no quarrel with Mirambo, and we cannot
     join every native to fight his neighbor. If Mirambo attacks the
     village while I am here, and will not go away when I ask him, we
     will fight, but we cannot stop here to wait for him.'

     "The poor king was very much distressed when we left the next
     morning. We despatched our scouts ahead, as we usually did when
     traversing troublous countries, and omitted no precaution to guard
     against surprise.

     [Illustration: A HUT AND ITS FRAME.]

     "On the 19th we arrived at one of the largest villages or towns in
     Unyamwezi, called Serombo or Sorombo. It was two miles and a half
     in circumference, and probably contained over a thousand large
     and small huts, and a population of about five thousand.

     [Illustration: VIEW IN THE INTERIOR OF AN AFRICAN VILLAGE.]

     "The present king's name is Ndega, a boy of sixteen, the son of
     Makaka, who died about two years ago. Too young himself to govern
     the large settlement and the country round, two elders, or
     Manyapara, act as regents during his minority.

     "We were shown to a peculiar-shaped hut, extremely like an
     Abyssinian dwelling. The height of the doorway was seven feet, and
     from the floor to the top of the conical roof it was twenty feet.
     The walls were of interwoven sticks, plastered over neatly with
     brown clay. The king's house was thirty feet high from the ground
     to the tip of the cone, and forty feet in diameter within; but the
     total diameter, including the circular fence or palisade that
     supported the broad eaves and enclosed a gallery which ran round
     the house, was fifty-four feet.

     [Illustration: SEROMBO HUTS.]

     "Owing to this peculiar construction a desperate body of one
     hundred and fifty men might from the circular gallery sustain a
     protracted attack from a vastly superior foe, and probably repel
     it.

     "Ndega is a relative of Mirambo by marriage, and he soon quieted
     all uneasy minds by announcing that the famous man who was now
     advancing upon Serombo had just concluded a peace with the Arabs,
     and that therefore no trouble was to be apprehended from his visit,
     it being solely a friendly visit to his young relative.

     "Naturally we were all anxious to behold the 'Mars of Africa,' who
     since 1871 has made his name feared by both native and foreigner
     from Usui to Urori, and from Uvinza to Ugogo, a country embracing
     ninety thousand square miles; who, from the village chieftainship
     over Uyoweh, has made for himself a name as well known as that of
     Mtesa throughout the eastern half of equatorial Africa, a household
     word from NyangwÃ© to Zanzibar, and the theme of many a song of the
     bards of Unyamwezi, Ukimbu, Ukonongo, Uzinja, and Uvinza.

     "On the evening of our arrival at Serombo's we heard his Brown
     Besses--called by the natives Gumeh-Gumeh--announcing to all that
     the man with the dread name lay not far from our vicinity.

     "At dusk the huge drums of Serombo signalled silence for the
     town-criers, whose voices, preceded by the sound of iron bells,
     were presently heard crying out:

     "'Listen, O men of Serombo. Mirambo, the brother of Ndega, cometh
     in the morning. Be ye prepared, therefore, for his young men are
     hungry. Send your women to dig potatoes, dig potatoes. Mirambo
     cometh. Dig potatoes, potatoes, dig potatoes, to-morrow!'

     [Illustration: WAR-DRUM AND IDOL.]

     "At 10 A.M. the Brown Besses, heavily charged and fired off by
     hundreds, loudly heralded Mirambo's approach, and nearly all my
     Wangwana followed the inhabitants of Serombo outside to see the
     famous chieftain. Great war-drums and the shouts of admiring
     thousands proclaimed that he had entered the town, and soon little
     Mabruki, the chief of the tent-boys, and KachÃ©chÃ©, the detective,
     on whose intelligence I could rely, brought an interesting budget
     to me.

     [Illustration: A "RUGA-RUGA," ONE OF MIRAMBO'S PATRIOTS.]

     "Mabruki said: 'We have seen Mirambo. He has arrived. We have
     beheld the Ruga-Ruga, and there are many of them, and all are armed
     with Gumeh-Gumeh. About a hundred are clothed in crimson cloth and
     white shirts, like our Wangwana. Mirambo is not an old man.'

     "KachÃ©chÃ© said: 'Mirambo is not old, he is young: I must be older
     than he is. He is a very nice man, well dressed, quite like an
     Arab. He wears the turban, fez, and cloth coat of an Arab, and
     carries a scimitar. He also wears slippers, and his clothes under
     his coat are very white. I should say he has about a thousand and a
     half men with him, and they are all armed with muskets or
     double-barrelled guns. Mirambo has three young men carrying his
     guns for him. Truly, Mirambo is a great man!'

     "The shrill Lu-lu-lu's, prolonged and loud, were still maintained
     by the women, who entertained a great respect for the greatest king
     in Unyamwezi.

     "Presently Manwa Sera, the chief captain of the Wangwana, came to
     my hut, to introduce three young men--Ruga-Ruga (bandits), as we
     called them, but must do so no more, lest we give
     offence--handsomely dressed in fine red and blue cloth coats, and
     snowy white shirts, with ample turbans around their heads. They
     were confidential captains of Mirambo's body-guard.

     "'Mirambo sends his salaams to the white man,' said the principal
     of them. 'He hopes the white man is friendly to him, and that he
     does not share the prejudices of the Arabs, and believe Mirambo a
     bad man. If it is agreeable to the white man, will he send words of
     peace to Mirambo?'

     "'Tell Mirambo,' I replied, 'that I am eager to see him, and would
     be glad to shake hands with so great a man; and as I have made
     strong friendship with Mtesa, Rumanika, and all the kings along the
     road from Usoga to Unyamwezi, I shall be rejoiced to make strong
     friendship with Mirambo also. Tell him I hope he will come and see
     me as soon as he can.'

     "The next day Mirambo, having despatched a Ruga-Ruga--no, a
     patriot, I should have said--to announce his coming, appeared with
     about twenty of his principal men.

     [Illustration: HILLSIDE HOUSE IN MIRAMBO'S COUNTRY.]

     "I shook hands with him with fervor, which drew a smile from him as
     he said, 'The white man shakes hands like a strong friend.'

     "His person quite captivated me, for he was a thorough African
     _gentleman_ in appearance, very different from my conception of the
     terrible bandit who had struck his telling blows at native chiefs
     and Arabs with all the rapidity of a Frederick the Great environed
     by foes.

     "I entered the following notes in my journal on April 22, 1876:

     "'This day will be memorable to me for the visit of the famous
     Mirambo. He was the reverse of all my conceptions of the
     redoubtable chieftain, and the man I had styled the "terrible
     bandit."

     "'He is a man about five feet eleven inches in height, and about
     thirty-five years old, with not an ounce of superfluous flesh about
     him. A handsome, regular-featured, mild-voiced, soft-spoken man,
     with what one might call a "meek" demeanor, very generous and
     open-handed. The character was so different from that which I had
     attributed to him that for some time a suspicion clung to my mind
     that I was being imposed upon, but Arabs came forward who testified
     that this quiet-looking man was indeed Mirambo. I had expected to
     see something of the Mtesa type, a man whose exterior would
     proclaim his life and rank; but this unpresuming, mild-eyed man, of
     inoffensive, meek exterior, whose action was so calm, without a
     gesture, presented to the eye nothing of the Napoleonic genius
     which he has for five years displayed in the heart of Unyamwezi, to
     the injury of Arabs and commerce, and the doubling of the price of
     ivory. I said there was _nothing_; but I must except the eyes,
     which had the steady, calm gaze of a master.

     [Illustration: UNYAMWEZI CHIEF AND HIS WIFE.]

     "'During the conversation I had with him, he said he preferred boys
     or young men to accompany him to war; he never took middle-aged or
     old men, as they were sure to be troubled with wives or children,
     and did not fight half so well as young fellows who listened to his
     words. Said he, "They have sharper eyes, and their young limbs
     enable them to move with the ease of serpents or the rapidity of
     zebras, and a few words will give them the hearts of lions. In all
     my wars with the Arabs, it was an army of youths that gave me
     victory, boys without beards. Fifteen of my young men died one day
     because I said I must have a certain red cloth that was thrown down
     as a challenge. No, no; give me youths for war in the open field,
     and men for the stockaded village."

     "'"What was the cause of your war, Mirambo, with the Arabs?" I
     asked.

     "'"There was a good deal of cause. The Arabs got the big head"
     (proud), "and there was no talking with them. Mkasiwa of UnyanyembÃ©
     lost his head too, and thought I was his vassal, whereas I was not.
     My father was king of Uyoweh, and I was his son. What right had
     Mkasiwa or the Arabs to say what I ought to do? But the war is now
     over--the Arabs know what I can do, and Mkasiwa knows it. We will
     not fight any more, but we will see who can do the best trade, and
     who is the smartest man. Any Arab or white man who would like to
     pass through my country is welcome. I will give him meat and drink,
     and a house, and no man shall hurt him."'

     "Mirambo retired, and in the evening I returned his visit with ten
     of the principal Wangwana. I found him in a bell-tent twenty feet
     high, and twenty-five feet in diameter, with his chiefs around him.

     "Manwa Sera was requested to seal our friendship by performing the
     ceremony of blood brotherhood between Mirambo and myself. Having
     caused us to sit fronting each other on a straw carpet, he made an
     incision in each of our right legs, from which he extracted blood,
     and, interchanging it, he exclaimed aloud:

     "'If either of you break this brotherhood now established between
     you, may the lion devour him, the serpent poison him, bitterness be
     in his food, his friends desert him, his gun burst in his hands and
     wound him, and everything that is bad do wrong to him until death.'

     "My new brother then gave me fifteen cloths to be distributed among
     my chiefs, while he would accept only three from me. But, not
     desirous of appearing illiberal, I presented him with a revolver
     and two hundred rounds of ammunition, and some small curiosities
     from England. Still ambitious to excel me in liberality, he charged
     five of his young men to proceed to Urambo, and to select three
     milch-cows with their calves, and three bullocks, to be driven to
     UbagwÃ© to meet me. He also gave me three guides to take me along
     the frontier of the predatory Watuta.

     [Illustration: SHIELD AND DRUM.]

     "On the morning of the 23d he accompanied me outside Serombo, where
     we parted on the very best terms with each other. An Arab in his
     company, named Sayid bin Mohammed, also presented me with a bar of
     Castile soap, a bag of pepper, and some saffron. A fine riding-ass,
     purchased from Sayid, was named Mirambo by me, because the
     Wangwana, who were also captivated by Mirambo's agreeable manners,
     insisted on it.

     "We halted on the 23d at Mayangira, seven miles and a half from
     Serombo, and on the 24th, after a protracted march of eleven miles
     south-southeast over flooded plains, arrived at Ukombeh.

     "Through similar flooded plains, with the water hip-deep in most
     places, and after crossing an important stream flowing
     west-southwest towards the Malagarazi, we arrived at Myonga's
     village, the capital of southern Masumbwa.

     [Illustration: COLOR-PARTY OF AN ENGLISH EXPEDITION IN AFRICA.]

     "This Myonga is the same valorous chief who robbed Colonel Grant as
     he was hurrying with an undisciplined caravan after Speke. (See
     Speke's Journal, page 159, for the following graphic letter:

  "'IN THE JUNGLES, NEAR MYONGA'S, _16th September, 1861_.

     "'MY DEAR SPEKE,--The caravan was attacked, plundered, and the men
     driven to the winds, while marching this morning into Myonga's
     country.

     "'Awaking at cock-crow, I roused the camp, all anxious to rejoin
     you; and while the loads were being packed, my attention was drawn
     to an angry discussion between the head men and seven or eight
     armed fellows sent by Sultan Myonga to insist on my putting up for
     the day in his village. They were summarily told that as _you_ had
     already made him a present, he need not expect a visit from _me_.
     Adhering, I doubt not, to their master's instructions, they
     officiously constituted themselves our guides till we chose to
     strike off their path, when, quickly heading our party, they
     stopped the way, planted their spears, and _dared_ our advance!

     "'This menace made us firmer in our determination, and we swept
     past the spears. After we had marched unmolested for some seven
     miles, a loud yelping from the woods excited our attention, and a
     sudden rush was made upon us by, say, two hundred men, who came
     down _seemingly_ in great glee. In an instant, at the caravan's
     centre, they fastened upon the poor porters. The struggle was
     short; and with the threat of an arrow or spear at their breasts,
     men were robbed of their cloths and ornaments, loads were yielded
     and run away with before resistance could be organized; only three
     men of a hundred stood by me; the others, whose only _thought_ was
     their lives, fled into the woods, where I went shouting for them.
     One man, little Rahan, stood with cocked gun, defending his load
     against five savages with uplifted spears. No one else could be
     seen. Two or three were reported killed, some were wounded. Beads,
     boxes, cloths, etc., lay strewed about the woods. In fact, I felt
     wrecked. My attempt to go and demand redress from the sultan was
     resisted, and, in utter despair, I seated myself among a mass of
     rascals jeering round me, and insolent after the success of the
     day. Several were dressed in the very cloths, etc., they had stolen
     from my men.

     "'In the afternoon about fifteen men and loads were brought me,
     with a message from the sultan, that the attack had been a
     _mistake_ of his subjects--that one man had had a hand cut off for
     it, and that all the property would be restored!

  "'Yours sincerely,
  "'J. A. GRANT.')

     "Age had not lessened the conceit of Myonga, increased his modesty,
     or moderated his cupidity. He asserted the rights and privileges of
     his royalty with a presumptuous voice and a stern brow. He demanded
     tribute! Twenty-five cloths. A gun and five fundo of beads! The
     Arabs, my friends, were requested to do the same!

     "'Impossible, Myonga!' I replied, yet struck with admiration at the
     unparalleled audacity of the man.

     "'People have been obliged to pay what I ask,' the old man said,
     with a cunning twinkle in his eyes.

     "'Perhaps,' I answered; 'but whether they have or not, I cannot pay
     you so much, and, what is more, I will not. As a sign that we pass
     through your country, I give you one cloth, and the Arabs shall
     only give you one cloth.'

     "Myonga blustered and stormed, begged and threatened, and some of
     his young men appeared to be getting vicious, when, rising, I
     informed him that to talk loudly was to act like a scolding woman,
     and that, when his elder should arrive at our camp, he would
     receive two cloths, one from me and one from the Arabs, as
     acknowledgment of his right to the country.

     "The drum of Myonga's village at once beat to arms, but the affair
     went no further, and the elder received the reasonable and just
     tribute of two cloths, with a gentle hint that it would be
     dangerous to intercept the expedition on the road when on the
     march, as the guns were loaded.

     [Illustration: MOUNTAINS ALONG THE ROUTE OF THE EXPEDITION.]

     "Phunze, chief of Mkumbiro, a village ten miles south by east from
     Myonga, and the chief of Ureweh, fourteen miles and a half from
     Phunze's, were equally bold in their demands, but they did not
     receive an inch of cloth; but neither of these three chiefs were
     half so extortionate as Ungomirwa, king of UbagwÃ©, a large town of
     three thousand people.

     "We met at UbagwÃ© an Arab trader _en route_ to Uganda, and he gave
     us a dismal tale of robbery and extortion practised on him by
     Ungomirwa. He had been compelled to pay one hundred and fifty
     cloths, five kegs, or fifty pounds, of gunpowder, five guns
     double-barrelled, and thirty-five pounds of beads, the whole being
     of the value of $625, or Â£125, for the privilege of passing
     unmolested through the district of UbagwÃ©.

     "When the chief came to see me, I said to him,

     "'Why is it, my friend, that your name goes about the country as
     being that of a bad man? How is it that this poor Arab has had to
     pay so much for going through UbagwÃ©? Is UbagwÃ© Unyamwezi, that
     Ungomirwa demands so much from the Arabs? The Arab brings cloths,
     powder, guns into Unyamwezi. If you rob him of his property, I must
     send letters to stop people coming here, then Ungomirwa will become
     poor, and have neither powder, guns, nor cloths to wear. What has
     Ungomirwa to say to his friend?'

     "'Ungomirwa,' replied he, 'does no more than Ureweh, Phunze,
     Myonga, Ndega, Urangwa, and Mankorongo--he takes what he can. If
     the white man thinks it is wrong, and will be my friend, I will
     return it all to the Arab.'

     "'Ungomirwa is good. Nay, do not return it all; retain one gun,
     five cloths, two fundo of beads, and one keg of powder; that will
     be plenty, and nothing but right. I have many Wanyamwezi with me,
     whom I have made good men. I have two from UbagwÃ©, and one man who
     was born at Phunze's. Let Ungomirwa call the Wanyamwezi, and ask
     them how the white man treats Wanyamwezi, and let him try to make
     them run away, and see what they will say. They will tell him that
     all white men are very good to those who are good.'

     "Ungomirwa called the Wanyamwezi to him, and asked them why they
     followed the white man to wander about the world, leaving their
     brothers and sisters. The question elicited the following reply:

     "'The white people know everything. They are better than the black
     people in heart. We have abundance to eat, plenty to wear, and
     silver for ourselves. All we give to the white man is our strength.
     We carry his goods for him, and he bestows a father's care on his
     black children. Let Ungomirwa make friends with the white man, and
     do as he says, and it will be good for the land of Unyamwezi.'

     "To whatever cause it was owing, Ungomirwa returned the Arab nearly
     all his property, and presented me with three bullocks; and during
     all the time that I was his guest at UbagwÃ©, he exhibited great
     friendship for me, and boasted of me to several Watuta visitors who
     came to see him during that time; indeed, I can hardly remember a
     more agreeable stay at any village in Africa than that which I made
     in UbagwÃ©.

     "Unyamwezi is troubled with a vast number of petty kings, whose
     paltriness and poverty have so augmented their pride that each of
     them employs more threats, and makes more demands, than Mtesa,
     emperor of Uganda.

     "The adage that 'Small things make base men proud' holds true in
     Africa as in other parts of the world. Sayid bin Sayf, one of the
     Arabs at Kafurro, begged me, as I valued my property and peace of
     mind, not to march through Unyamwezi to Ujiji, but to travel
     through Uhha. I attribute these words of Sayid's to a desire on his
     part to hear of my being mulcted by kings Khanza, Iwanda, and Kiti
     in the same proportion that he was. He confessed that he had paid
     to Kiti sixty cloths, to Iwanda sixty cloths, and to king Khanza
     one hundred and thirty-eight, which amounted in value to $516, and
     this grieved the gentle merchant's soul greatly.

     [Illustration: FASHIONABLE HAIR-DRESSING.]

     "On my former journey in search of Livingstone, I tested
     sufficiently the capacity of the chiefs of Uhha to absorb property,
     and I vowed then to give them a wide berth for all future time.
     Sayid's relation of his experiences, confirmed by Hamed Ibrahim,
     and my own reverses, indicated but too well the custom in vogue
     among the Wahha. So far, between Kibogora's capital and UbagwÃ©, I
     had only disbursed thirty cloths as gifts to nine kings of
     Unyamwezi, without greater annoyance than the trouble of having to
     reduce their demands by negotiation.

     "On the 4th of May, having received the milch-cows, calves, and
     bullocks from my new brother Mirambo, we marched in a
     south-southwest direction, skirting the territory of the Watuta, to
     Ruwinga, a village occupying a patch of cleared land, and ruled by
     a small chief who is a tributary to his dreaded neighbors.

     "The next day, in good order, we marched across a portion of the
     territory of the Watuta. No precaution was omitted to insure our
     being warned in time of the presence of the enemy, nor did we make
     any delay on the road, as a knowledge of their tactics of attack
     assured us that this was our only chance of avoiding a conflict
     with them. MsenÃ©, after a journey of twenty miles, was reached
     about 2 P.M., and the king, Mulagwa, received us with open arms.

     "The population of the three villages under Mulagwa probably
     numbers about thirty-five hundred. The king of the Watuta
     frequently visits Mulagwa's district; but his strongly-fenced
     villages and large number of muskets have been sufficient to check
     the intentions of the robbers, though atrocious acts are often
     committed upon the unwary.

     "Ten miles southwest of MsenÃ© is Kawangira, a district about ten
     miles square, governed by the chief Nyambu, a rival of Mulagwa.
     Relics of the ruthlessness and devastating attacks of the Watuta
     are visible between the two districts, and the once populous land
     is rapidly resuming its original appearance of a tenantless waste.

     [Illustration: ONE OF THE WATUTA.]

     "The next village, Nganda, ten miles southwest from Kawangira, was
     reached on the 9th of May. From this place, as far as Usenda
     (distant fourteen miles south-southwest), extended a plain,
     inundated with from two to five feet of water from the flooded
     GombÃ©, which rises about forty miles southeast of UnyanyembÃ©. Where
     the GombÃ© meets with the Malagarazi, there is a spacious plain,
     which during each rainy season is converted into a lake.

     "We journeyed to the important village of Usagusi on the 12th, in a
     south-southwest direction. Like Serombo, Myonga's, Urangwa, UbagwÃ©,
     and MsenÃ©, it is strongly stockaded, and the chief, conscious that
     the safety of his principal village depends upon the care he
     bestows upon its defences, exacts heavy fines upon those of his
     people who manifest any reluctance to repair the stockade; and this
     vigilant prudence has hitherto baffled the wolflike marauders of
     Ugomba.

     "Twenty-five miles in a westerly direction through a depopulated
     land brought us to Zegi, in Uvinza, where we found a large caravan,
     under an Arab in the employ of Sayid bin Habib. Among these natives
     of Zanzibar was a man who had accompanied Cameron and Tippu-Tib to
     Utatera. Like other Munchausens of his race, he informed me upon
     oath that he had seen a ship upon a lake west of Utatera, manned by
     black Wazungu, or black Europeans!

     [Illustration: BOW, SPEARS, HATCHETS, AND ARROW-HEADS.]

     "Before reaching Zegi, we saw SivuÃ© Lake, a body of water fed by
     the Sagala River; it is about seven miles wide by fourteen miles
     long. Through a broad bed, choked by reeds and grass and tropical
     plants, it empties into the Malagarazi River near Kiala.

     "Zegi swarmed with a reckless number of lawless men, and was not a
     comfortable place to dwell in. The conduct of these men was another
     curious illustration of how 'small things make base men proud.'
     Here were a number of youths suffering under that strange disease
     peculiar to vain youth in all lands, which Mirambo had called 'big
     head.' The manner in which they strutted about, their big looks and
     bold staring, their enormous feathered head-dresses and martial
     stride, were most offensive. Having adopted, from bravado, the name
     of Ruga-Ruga, they were compelled in honor to imitate the bandits'
     custom of smoking banghi (wild hemp), and my memory fails to remind
     me of any similar experience to the wild screaming and stormy
     sneezing, accompanied day and night by the monotonous droning of
     the one-string guitar (another accomplishment with the complete
     bandit) and the hiccoughing, snorting, and vocal extravagances
     which we had to bear in the village of Zegi.

     [Illustration: IDOLS SHELTERED FROM THE RAIN.]

     "For the next few days there were no incidents of importance, our
     march being pressed with as little delay as possible. At noon of
     the 27th of May the bright waters of the Tanganika broke upon the
     view, and compelled me to linger admiringly for a while, as I did
     on the day I first beheld them. By 3 P.M. we were in Ujiji. Muini
     Kheri, Mohammed bin Gharib, Sultan bin Kassim, and Khamis the
     Baluch greeted me kindly. Mohammed bin Sali was dead. Nothing was
     changed much, except the ever-changing mud tembÃ©s of the Arabs. The
     square or plaza where I met David Livingstone in November, 1871, is
     now occupied by large tembÃ©s. The house where he and I lived has
     long ago been burned down, and in its place there remain only a few
     embers and a hideous void. The lake expands with the same grand
     beauty before the eyes as we stand in the market-place. The
     opposite mountains of Goma have the same blue-black color, for they
     are everlasting, and the LiuchÃ© River continues its course as brown
     as ever just east and south of Ujiji. The surf is still as
     restless, and the sun as bright; the sky retains its glorious
     azure, and the palms all their beauty; but the grand old hero,
     whose presence once filled Ujiji with such absorbing interest for
     me, was gone!"

[Illustration: ARAB HOUSE NEAR UJIJI.]

"And here at Ujiji," said Frank, "we will pause for the present. We have
read the first volume of Mr. Stanley's very interesting work, and this
evening we'll begin reading the second. The story it contains is even
more exciting than that which you have just heard; it carries us among
new people and into new lands, and introduces us to a part of the
continent unknown to Europeans until Mr. Stanley made his remarkable
journey through it."

A motion to adjourn was carried unanimously, and very soon the party was
dispersed over the steamer's deck. Some of them looked around for Mr.
Stanley, and were disappointed to hear that he had not been visible
about the deck or saloon for several hours.

[Illustration: WHISTLE, PILLOW, AND HATCHET.]




CHAPTER VII.

MR. STANLEY TAKES THE CHAIR.--DESCRIPTION OF UJIJI.--THE ARAB AND OTHER
INHABITANTS.--MARKET SCENES.--LOCAL CURRENCY.--THE WAJIJI.--LAKE
TANGANIKA.--STANLEY'S VOYAGE ON THE LAKE.--RISING OF THE WATERS.--THE
LEGEND OF THE WELL.--HOW THE LAKE WAS FORMED.--DEPARTURE OF THE
EXPEDITION.--SCENERY OF THE COAST.--MOUNTAINS WHERE THE SPIRITS
DWELL.--SEEKING THE OUTLET OF THE LAKE.--THE LUKUGA RIVER.--EXPERIMENTS
TO FIND A CURRENT.--CURIOUS HEAD-DRESSES.--RETURN TO UJIJI.--LENGTH AND
EXTENT OF LAKE TANGANIKA.


When the party assembled in the evening, Frank was not in the place
where the others expected to find him; he was among the auditors, and
his former seat was occupied by Mr. Stanley. The latter said he had been
sleeping during most of the afternoon, and would atone for his indolence
by telling the story of a portion of his work after the arrival of the
expedition at Ujiji.

[Illustration: HEAD OF UGUHHA WOMAN.]

"As you have assembled to hear the story of the Dark Continent," said
Mr. Stanley, as soon as all were seated, "you shall not be disappointed.
You can imagine that I am reading from the book, and I will keep it in
my hands to assist your imaginations."

Without further preliminary the distinguished explorer plunged at once
into the midst of his subject and carried his audience, as on the
enchanted carpet of the "Arabian Nights," straight to the shores of Lake
Tanganika.

[Illustration: UJIJI, LOOKING NORTH FROM THE MARKET-PLACE, VIEWED FROM
THE ROOF OF OUR TEMBÃ‰ AT UJIJI.

(_From a Photograph by Mr. Stanley._)]

     "The best view of Ujiji is to be obtained from the flat roof of one
     of the Arab tembÃ©s or houses. Here is a photograph presenting a
     view north from my tembÃ©, which fronted the market-place. It
     embraces the square and conical huts of the Wangwana, Wanyamwezi,
     and Arab slaves, the Guinea palms from the golden-colored nuts of
     which the Wajiji obtain the palm-oil, the banana and plantain
     groves, with here and there a graceful papaw-tree rising among
     them, and, beyond, the dark-green woods which line the shore and
     are preserved for shade by the fishermen.

     "South of the market-place are the tembÃ©s of the Arabs, solid,
     spacious, flat-roofed structures, built of clay, with broad, cool
     verandas fronting the public roads. Palms and papaws, pomegranates
     and plantains, raise graceful branch and frond above them, in
     pleasing contrast to the gray-brown walls, enclosures, and houses.

     "The port of Ujiji is divided into two districts--Ugoy, occupied by
     the Arabs, and KawelÃ©, inhabited by the Wangwana, slaves, and
     natives. The market-place is in Ugoy, in an open space which has
     been lately contracted to about twelve hundred square yards. In
     1871 it was nearly three thousand square yards. On the beach before
     the market-place are drawn up the huge Arab canoes, which,
     purchased in Goma on the western shore, have had their gunwales
     raised up with heavy teak planking. The largest canoe, belonging to
     Sheik Abdullah bin Sulieman, is forty-eight feet long, nine feet in
     the beam, and five feet high, with a poop for the nakhuda
     (captain), and a small forecastle.

     [Illustration: ARAB DHOW AT UJIJI.]

     "Sheik Abdullah, by assuming the air of an opulent ship-owner, has
     offended the vanity of the governor, Muini Kheri, who owns nine
     canoes. Abdullah christened his 'big ship' by some very proud name;
     the governor nicknamed it the _Lazy_. The Arabs and Wajiji, by the
     way, all give names to their canoes.

     "The hum and bustle of the market-place, filled with a
     miscellaneous concourse of representatives from many tribes, woke
     me up at early dawn. Curious to see the first market-place we had
     come to since leaving Kagehyi, I dressed myself and sauntered among
     the buyers and sellers and idlers.

     "Here we behold all the wealth of the Tanganika shores. The Wajiji,
     who are sharp, clever traders, having observed that the Wangwana
     purchased their supplies of sweet potatoes, yams, sugar-cane,
     ground-nuts, oil-nuts, palm-oil and palm-wine, butter, and pombÃ©,
     to retail them at enormous profits to their countrymen, have raised
     their prices on some things a hundred per cent. over what they were
     when I was in Ujiji last. This has caused the Wangwana and slaves
     to groan in spirit, for the Arabs are unable to dole out to them
     rations in proportion to the prices now demanded. The governor,
     supplied by the MutwarÃ© of the lake district of Ujiji, will not
     interfere, though frequently implored to do so, and, consequently,
     there are frequent fights, when the Wangwana rush on the natives
     with clubs, in much the same manner as the apprentices of London
     used to rush to the rescue or succor of one of their bands.

     [Illustration: A NATIVE OF RUA, WHO WAS A VISITOR AT UJIJI.]

     "Except the Wajiji, who have become rich in cloths, the rural
     natives retain the primitive dress worn by the Wazinja and other
     tribes, a dressed goat-skin covering the loins, and hanging down to
     within six inches above the knees, with long depending tags of the
     same material. All these tribes are related to each other, and
     their language shows only slight differences in dialect. Moreover,
     many of those inhabiting the countries contiguous to Unyamwezi and
     Uganda have lost those special characteristics which distinguish
     the pure unmixed stock from the less favored and less refined types
     of Africans.

     "Uhha daily sends to the market of Ujiji its mtama, grain (millet),
     sesamum, beans, fowls, goats, and broad-tailed sheep, butter, and
     sometimes oxen; Urundi, its goats, sheep, oxen, butter, palm-oil
     and palm-nuts, fowls, bananas, and plantains; UzigÃ©--now and then
     only--its oxen and palm-oil; Uvira, its iron, in wire of all sizes,
     bracelets, and anklets; Ubwari, its cassava or manioc, dried, and
     enormous quantities of grain, Dogara or whitebait, and dried fish;
     Uvinza, its salt; Uguha, its goats and sheep, and grain, especially
     Indian corn; rural Wajiji bring their buttermilk, ground-nuts,
     sweet potatoes, tomatoes, bananas and plantains, yams, beans,
     vetches, garden herbs, melons, cucumbers, sugar-cane, palm-wine,
     palm-nuts, palm-oil, goats, sheep, bullocks, eggs, fowls, and
     earthenware; the lake-coast Wajiji bring their slaves, whitebait,
     fresh fish, ivory, baskets, nets, spears, bows and arrows; the
     Wangwana and Arab slaves bring fuel, ivory, wild fruit, eggs, rice,
     sugar-cane, and honey from the Ukaranga forest.

     [Illustration: DRESS AND TATTOOING OF A NATIVE OF UGUHHA.]

     "The currency employed consists of cloths, blue 'Kaniki,' white
     sheeting 'Merikani' from Massachusetts mills, striped or barred
     prints, or checks, blue or red, from Manchester, Muscat, or Cutch,
     and beads, principally 'Sofi,' which are like black-and-white
     clay-pipe stems broken into pieces half an inch long. One piece is
     called a _Masaro_, and is the lowest piece of currency that will
     purchase anything. The Sofi beads are strung in strings of twenty
     Masaro, which is then called a _KhetÃ©_, and is sufficient to
     purchase rations for two days for a slave, but suffices the freeman
     or Mgwana but one day. The red beads, called Sami-sami, the
     Mutanda, small blue, brown, and white, will also readily be
     bartered in the market for provisions, but a discount will be
     charged on them, as the established and universal currency with all
     classes of natives attending the market is the Sofi.

     "The prices at the market of Ujiji in 1876 were as follows:

                                           Sheeting cloths
                                         of four yards long.

  Ivory per lb.                                    1
  1 goat                                           2
  1 sheep                                          1-1/2
  12 fowls                                         1-1/2
  1 bullock                                       10
  60 lbs. of grain--Mtama                          1
  90 lbs. of grain--Indian corn                    1
  1/2-gal. potful of honey in the comb             1
  1 slave boy between 10 and 13 years old         16
  1 slave girl between 10 and 13 years old        50 to 80
  1 slave woman between 18 and 30 years old       80 to 130
  1 slave boy between 13 and 18 years old         16 to 50
  1 slave man between 18 and 50 years old         10 to 50

     "The country of Ujiji extends between the LiuchÃ© River, along the
     Tanganika, north to the Mshala River, which gives it a length of
     forty-five miles. The former river separates it from Ukaranga on
     the south, while the latter river acts as a boundary between it and
     Urundi. As Ujiji is said to border upon Uguru, a district of Uhha,
     it may be said to have a breadth of twenty miles. Thus the area of
     Ujiji is not above nine hundred square miles. The Mtemi, or king,
     is called Mgassa, who entertains a superstitious fear of the lake.
     His residence is in a valley among the mountains bordering upon
     Uguru, and he believes that in the hour he looks upon the lake he
     dies.

     "I should estimate the population of the country to be very fairly
     given at forty to the square mile, which will make it thirty-six
     thousand souls. The LiuchÃ© valley is comparatively populous, and
     the port of Ujiji--consisting of Ugoy and KawelÃ© districts--has
     alone a population of three thousand. Kigoma and Kasimbu are other
     districts patronized by Arabs and Wangwana.

     "The Wajiji are a brave tribe, and of very independent spirit, but
     not quarrelsome. When the moderate fee demanded by the MutwarÃ© of
     Ugoy, KawelÃ©, and Kasimbu is paid, the stranger has the liberty of
     settling in any part of the district; and, as an excellent
     understanding exists between the MutwarÃ© and the Arab governor,
     Muini Kheri, there is no fear of ill-usage. The Mgwana or the Mjiji
     applying to either of them is certain of receiving fair justice,
     and graver cases are submitted to an international commission of
     Arabs and Wajiji elders, because it is perfectly understood by both
     parties that many moneyed interests would be injured if open
     hostilities were commenced.

     "The Wajiji are the most expert canoe-men of all the tribes around
     the Tanganika. They have visited every country, and seem to know
     each headland, creek, bay, and river. Sometimes they meet with
     rough treatment, but they are as a rule so clever, wide-awake,
     prudent, commercially politic, and superior in tact, that only
     downright treachery can entrap them to death. They have so many
     friends also that they soon become informed of danger, and
     dangerous places are tabooed.

     [Illustration: CHARMS WORN BY THE WAJIJI.]

     "The governor of the Arab colony of Ujiji, having been an old
     friend, was, as may be supposed, courteous and hospitable to me,
     and Mohammed bin Gharib, who was so good to Livingstone between
     Marungu and Ujiji, as far as Manyema, did his best to show me
     friendly attention. Such luxuries as sweetmeats, wheaten bread,
     rice, and milk were supplied so freely by Muini Kheri and Sheik
     Mohammed that both Frank and myself began to increase rapidly in
     weight.

     "Judging from their rotundity of body, it may fairly be said that
     both the friends enjoy life. The governor is of vast girth, and
     Mohammed is nearly as large in the waist. The preceding governor,
     Mohammed bin Sali, was also of ample circumference, from which I
     conclude that the climate of Ujiji agrees with the Arab
     constitution. It certainly did not suit mine while I was with
     Livingstone, for I was punished with remittent and intermittent
     fever of such severe type and virulence that in three months I was
     reduced in weight to ninety-eight pounds.

     [Illustration: A RIVER FERRY-BOAT.]

     "Muini Kheri's whole wealth consists of about one hundred and
     twenty slaves, eighty guns, eighty frasilah of ivory, two tembÃ©s,
     or houses, a wheat and rice field, nine canoes with oars and sails,
     forty head of cattle, twenty goats, thirty bales of cloth, and
     twenty sacks of beads, three hundred and fifty pounds of brass
     wire, and two hundred pounds of iron wire, all of which, appraised
     in the Ujiji market, might perhaps realize $18,000. His friend
     Mohammed is probably worth $3000 only! Sultan bin Kassim may
     estimate the value of his property at $10,000; Abdullah bin
     Suliman, the owner of the _Great Eastern_ of Lake Tanganika, at
     $15,000. Other Arabs of Ujiji may be rated at from $100 to $3000.

     "Sheik Mohammed bin Gharib is the owner of the finest house. It is
     about one hundred feet long by twenty-five feet in width and
     fourteen feet in height. A broad veranda, ten feet wide and forty
     feet long, runs along a portion of the front, and affords ample
     space for the accommodation of his visitors on the luxurious
     carpets. The building is constructed of sun-dried brick plastered
     over neatly with clay. The great door is a credit to his carpenter,
     and his latticed windows are a marvel to the primitive native
     trader from Uhha or Uvinza. The courtyard behind the house contains
     the huts of the slaves, kitchens, and cow-house.

     [Illustration: HEADS OF NATIVES.]

     "There is a good deal of jealousy between the Arabs of Ujiji, which
     sometimes breaks out into bloodshed. When Sayid bin Habib enters
     Ujiji trouble is not far off. The son of Habib has a large number
     of slaves, and there are some fiery souls among them, who resent
     the least disparagement of their master. A bitter reproach is soon
     followed by a vengeful blow, and then the retainers and the chiefs
     of the Montagues and Capulets issue forth with clubs, spears, and
     guns, and Ujiji is all in an uproar, not to be quieted until the
     respective friends of the two rivals carry them bodily away to
     their houses. On Arabs, Wangwana, and slaves alike I saw the scars
     of feuds.

     [Illustration: THE WAZARAMO TRIBE.]

     "Life in Ujiji begins soon after dawn, and, except on moonlight
     nights, no one is abroad after sunset. With the Arabs--to whom
     years are as days to Europeans--it is a languid existence, mostly
     spent in gossip, the interchange of dignified visits, ceremonies of
     prayer, an hour or two of barter, and small household affairs.

     "There were no letters for either Frank or myself after our
     seventeen months' travels around and through the lake regions. From
     Kagehyi, on Lake Victoria, I had despatched messages to Sayid bin
     Salim, governor of UnyanyembÃ©, praying him to send all letters
     addressed to me to Muini Kheri, governor of Ujiji, promising him a
     noble reward. Not that I was sure that I should pass by Ujiji, but
     I knew that, if I arrived at NyangwÃ©, I should be able to send a
     force of twenty men to Muini Kheri for my letters. Though Sayid
     bin Salim had over twelve months' time to comply with my moderate
     request, not a scrap or word of news or greeting refreshed us after
     the long blank interval! Both of us, having eagerly looked forward
     with certainty to receiving a bagful of letters, were therefore
     much disappointed.

     "As I was about to circumnavigate the Tanganika with my boat, and
     would probably be absent two or three months, I thought there might
     still be a chance of obtaining them before setting out westward, by
     despatching messengers to UnyanyembÃ©. Announcing my intentions to
     the governor, I obtained a promise that he would collect other men,
     as he and several Arabs at Ujiji were also anxious to communicate
     with their friends. Manwa Sera therefore selected five of the most
     trustworthy men, the Arabs also selected five of their confidential
     slaves, and the ten men started for UnyanyembÃ© on the 3d of June.

     "My five trustworthy men arrived at UnyanyembÃ© within fifteen days,
     but from some cause they never returned to the expedition. We
     halted at Ujiji for seventy days after their departure, and when we
     turned our faces towards NyangwÃ©, we had given up all hopes of
     hearing from civilization.

     "Before departing on the voyage of circumnavigation of Lake
     Tanganika, many affairs had to be provided for, such as the
     well-being of the expedition during my absence, distribution of
     sufficient rations, provisioning for the cruise, the engagement of
     guides, etc.

     "The two guides I obtained for the lake were Para, who had
     accompanied Cameron in March and April, 1874, and Ruango, who
     accompanied Livingstone and myself in December, 1871, to the north
     end of Lake Tanganika.

     "The most interesting point connected with this lake was its
     outlet. Before starting from Zanzibar, I had heard that Cameron had
     discovered the outlet to Lake Tanganika in the Lukuga River, which
     ran through Uguha to the west, and was therefore an affluent of
     Livingstone's great river.

     "I made many inquiries among the Arabs and natives, but could learn
     nothing about an outlet of the lake. The guide who accompanied
     Cameron declared that no such outlet had been found while he was
     with that officer, and, furthermore, all the streams he knew of
     flowed into and not from Tanganika. All this testimony inspired me
     with the resolution to explore the phenomenon thoroughly, and to
     examine the entire coast minutely. At the same time, a suspicion
     that there was no present outlet to the Tanganika had crept into my
     mind, when I observed that three palm-trees, which had stood in the
     market-place of Ujiji in November, 1871, were now about one hundred
     feet in the lake, and that the sand beach over which Livingstone
     and I took our morning walks was over two hundred feet in the lake.

     "I asked of Muini Kheri and Sheik Mohammed if my impressions were
     not correct about the palm-trees, and they both replied readily in
     the affirmative. Muini Kheri said also, as corroborative of the
     increase of the Tanganika, that thirty years ago the Arabs were
     able to ford the channel between BangwÃ© Island and the mainland;
     that they then cultivated rice-fields three miles farther west than
     the present beach; that every year the Tanganika encroaches upon
     their shores and fields; and that they are compelled to move every
     five years farther inland. In my photograph of Ujiji, an inlet may
     be seen on a site which was dry land, occupied by fishing-nets and
     pasture-ground, in 1871.

     [Illustration: RAWLINSON MOUNTAINS, LAKE TANGANIKA.]

     "The Wajiji lake-traders and fishermen have an interesting legend
     respecting the origin of the Tanganika. Ruango, the veteran guide,
     who showed Livingstone and myself the Rusizi River in 1871, and
     whose version is confirmed by Para, the other guide, related it as
     follows:

     "'Years and years ago, where you see this great lake, was a wide
     plain, inhabited by many tribes and nations, who owned large herds
     of cattle and flocks of goats, just as you see Uhha to-day.

     "'On this plain there was a very large town, fenced round with
     poles strong and high. As was the custom in those days, the people
     of the town surrounded their houses with tall hedges of cane,
     enclosing courts, where their cattle and goats were herded at night
     from the wild beasts and from thieves. In one of these enclosures
     lived a man and his wife, who possessed a deep well, from which
     water bubbled up and supplied a beautiful little stream, at which
     the cattle of their neighbors slaked their thirst.

     "'Strange to say, this well contained countless fish, which
     supplied both the man and his wife with an abundant supply for
     their wants; but as their possession of these treasures depended
     upon the secrecy which they preserved respecting them, no one
     outside their family circle knew anything of them. A tradition was
     handed down for ages, through the family, from father to son, that
     on the day they showed the well to strangers they would be ruined
     and destroyed.

     "'One day, while the husband was absent, a stranger called at the
     house and talked so pleasantly that the wife forgot all about the
     tradition, and showed him the well. The man had never seen such
     things in his life, for there were no rivers in the neighborhood
     except that which was made by this fountain. His delight was very
     great, and he sat for some time watching the fish leaping and
     chasing each other, showing their white bellies and beautiful
     bright sides, and coming up to the surface and diving swiftly down
     to the bottom. He had never enjoyed such pleasure; but when one of
     the boldest of the fish came near to where he was sitting he
     suddenly put forth his hand to catch it. Ah, that was the end of
     all!--for the Muzimu, the spirit, was angry. And the world cracked
     asunder, the plain sank down and down and down--the bottom cannot
     now be reached by our longest lines--and the fountain overflowed
     and filled the great gap that was made by the earthquake, and now
     what do you see? The Tanganika! All the people of that great plain
     perished, and all the houses and fields and gardens, the herds of
     cattle and flocks of goats and sheep, were swallowed in the
     waters.'

     [Illustration: HEAD-DRESS AND HATCHET.]

     "I made many attempts to discover whether the Wajiji knew why the
     lake was called Tanganika. A rational definition I could not obtain
     until one day, while translating some English words into their
     language, I came to the word 'plain,' for which I obtained _nika_
     as being the term in Kijiji. As Africans are accustomed to
     describe large bodies of water as being like plains, 'it spreads
     out like a plain,' I think that a satisfactory signification of the
     term has finally been obtained, in 'the plain-like lake.'

     [Illustration: BROTHER ROCKS.]

     "Westward from Ujiji the lake spreads to a distance of about
     thirty-five miles, where it is bounded by the lofty mountain range
     of Goma, and it is when looking northwest that one comprehends, as
     he follows that vague and indistinct mountain line, ever paling as
     it recedes, the full magnificence of this inland sea. The low
     island of BangwÃ© on the eastern side terminates the bay of Ujiji,
     which rounds with a crescent curve from the market-place towards
     it.

     "The saucy English-built boat which had made the acquaintance of
     all the bays and inlets of the Victoria Nyanza, and been borne on
     the shoulders of sturdy men across the plains and through the
     ravines of Unyoro, is about to explore the mountain barriers which
     enfold Lake Tanganika, for the discovery of some gap which lets
     out, or is supposed to let out, the surplus water of rivers which,
     from a dim and remote period, have been pouring into it from all
     sides.

     "She has a consort now, a lumbering, heavy, but stanch mate, a
     canoe cut out from an enormous teak-tree which once grew in some
     wooded gorge in the Goma Mountains. The canoe is called the
     _Meofu_, and is the property of Muini Kheri, Governor of Ujiji, who
     has kindly lent it to me. As he is my friend, he says he will not
     charge me anything for the loan. But the governor and I know each
     other pretty well, and I know that when I return from the voyage I
     shall have to make him a present. In Oriental and African lands,
     remuneration, hire, compensation, guerdon, and present are terms
     nearly related to one another.

     "The boat and her consort are ready on the 11th of June, 1876. The
     boat's crew have been most carefully selected. They are all young,
     agile, faithful creatures. Their names and ages are as follows:
     Uledi, the coxswain, 25 years; Saywa, his cousin, 17; Shumari, his
     brother, 18; Murabo, 20; Mpwapwa, 22; Marzouk, 23; Akida, 20;
     Mambu, 20; Wadi Baraka, 24; Zaidi Rufiji, 27; Matiko, 19. Two
     supernumeraries are the boy gun-bearers, Billali and Mabruki, 17
     and 15 years respectively. After eighteen months' experience with
     them it has been decided by all that these are the elect of the
     expedition for boat-work, though they are by no means the champions
     of the march. But as they have only light loads, there has never
     been reason to complain of them.

     "There is much handshaking, many cries of 'Take care of
     yourselves,' and then both boat and canoe hoist sail, turning their
     heads along the coast to the south.

     "We followed along this coast to the southern extremity of the
     lake, examining every river with the greatest care, in the full
     determination of finding the outlet if any existed. Then we
     followed the western coast in the same way, examining the rivers
     and studying the picturesque shores, which were bounded in many
     places by lofty hills or mountains. Many of these hills are
     supposed to be the dwelling-places of spirits who have control over
     the lake in various ways.

     [Illustration: THE EXTREME SOUTHERN REACH OF LAKE TANGANIKA.]

     "That part of the western coast which extends from MbetÃ© or
     MombetÃ©, to the south, as far as the Rufuvu River, is sacred ground
     in the lore of the ancients of Urungu. Each crag and grove, each
     awful mountain brow and echoing gorge, has its solemn associations
     of spirits. Vague and indescribable beings, engendered by fear and
     intense superstition, govern the scene. Any accident that may
     befall, any untoward event or tragedy that may occur, before the
     sanctuaries of these unreal powers, is carefully treasured in the
     memories of the people with increased awe and dread of the Spirits
     of the Rocks.

     "Such associations cling to the strange tabular mounts or natural
     towers, called Mtombwa, of which a sketch is annexed. The height of
     these is about twelve hundred feet above the lake. They once
     formed parts of the plateau of Urungu, though now separated from it
     by the same agency which created the fathomless gulf of the
     Tanganika.

     [Illustration: MTOMBWA.]

     "Within a distance of two miles are three separate mounts, which
     bear a resemblance to one another. The first is called Mtombwa, the
     next Kateye, the third Kapembwa. Their three spirits are also
     closely akin to one another, for they all rule the wave and the
     wind, and dwell on summits. Kateye is, I believe, the son of
     Kapembwa, the Jupiter, and Mtombwa, the Juno, of Tanganika
     tradition.

     "As we row past, close to their base, we look up to admire the
     cliffy heights rising in terraces one above another; each
     terrace-ledge is marked by a thin line of scrubby bush. Beyond
     Kateye, the gray front of the paternal Kapembwa looms up with an
     extraordinary height and massive grandeur.

     "The peaks of KungwÃ© are probably from two thousand five hundred to
     three thousand feet above the lake. They are not only interesting
     from their singular appearance, but also as being a refuge for the
     last remaining families of the aborigines of Kawendi. On the
     topmost and most inaccessible heights dwells the remnant of the
     once powerful nation which in old times--so tradition
     relates--overran Uhha and Uvinza, and were a terror to the
     Wakalaganza. They cultivate the slopes of their strongholds, which
     amply repay them for their labor. Fuel is found in the gorges
     between the peaks, and means of defence are at hand in the huge
     rocks which they have piled up ready to repel the daring intruder.
     Their elders retain the traditions of the race whence they sprang;
     and in their charge are the Lares and Penates of old Kawendi--the
     Muzimu. In the home of the eagles they find a precarious existence,
     as a seed to reproduce another nation, or as a short respite before
     complete extermination.

     [Illustration: KUNGWÃ‰ PEAKS.

     (_From a sketch near the entrance to the Luwulungu torrent bed._)]

     "The best view of this interesting clump of mountain heights is to
     be had off the mouth of the torrent Luwulungu.

     "Everywhere we went we could see that the lake was rising. In
     places where I had camped with Livingstone in 1871 there were now
     several feet of water, and the guides repeatedly called my
     attention to low islands and beaches that were now submerged. One
     of the most interesting points we visited was Lukuga Creek, where
     Cameron thought he discovered the outlet of the lake. We reached it
     on July 16th, and made a careful survey.

     "The mouth of the Lukuga, which was about two thousand five hundred
     yards wide, narrowed after a mile to eight hundred yards, and after
     another mile to four or five hundred yards. Upon rounding the point
     of land on which Mkampemba stands, and where there is a
     considerable tract under tillage, I observed that the water changed
     its color to a reddish brown, owing to the ferruginous conglomerate
     of which the low bluffs on either side are composed. This was also
     a proof to me that there was no outflowing river here. Clear water
     outflowing from the Tanganika, only two miles from the lake, ought
     never to be so deeply discolored.

     "Wherever there were indentations in the bluffs that banked it in,
     or a dip in the low, grass-covered _dÃ©bris_ beneath, a growth of
     matetÃ©, or water-cane, and papyrus filled up these bits of still
     water, but mid-channel was clear, and maintained a breadth of open
     white water ranging from ninety to four hundred and fifty yards.

     [Illustration: THE "HIGH PLACES" OF THE SPIRIT MTOMBWA: VIEW OF
     MTOMBWA URUNGU.]

     "Within an hour we arrived at the extremity of the open water,
     which had gradually been narrowed in width, by the increasing
     abundance of papyrus, from two hundred and fifty yards to forty
     yards. We ceased rowing, and gently glided up to the barrier of
     papyrus, which had now completely closed up the creek from bank
     to bank, like a luxuriant field of tall Indian corn. We sounded at
     the base of these reeds along a breadth of forty yards, and
     obtained from seven to eleven feet of water! With a portable level
     I attempted to ascertain a current; the level indicated none! Into
     a little pool, completely sheltered by the broadside of the boat,
     we threw a chip or two, and some sticks. In five minutes the chips
     had moved towards the reeds about a foot! We then crushed our way
     through about twenty yards of the papyrus, and came to impassable
     mud-banks, black as pitch, and seething with animal life. Returning
     to the boat, I asked four men to stand close together, and,
     mounting their shoulders with an oar for support, I endeavored,
     with a glass, to obtain a general view. I saw a broad belt, some
     two hundred and fifty or three hundred yards wide, of a
     papyrus-grown depression, lying east and west between
     gently-sloping banks, thinly covered with scrubby acacia. Here and
     there were pools of open water, and beyond were a few trees
     growing, as it seemed to me, right in the bed. I caused some of my
     men to attempt to cross from one bank to the other, but the muddy
     ooze was not sufficiently firm to bear the weight of a man.

     [Illustration: MOUNT MURUMBI, NEAR LUKUGA CREEK.]

     "I then cut a disk of wood a foot in diameter, drove a nail in, and
     folded cotton under its head. I then rove a cord five feet in
     length through this, suspending to one end an earthenware pot, with
     which I tried an experiment. Along the hedge of papyrus I measured
     one thousand feet with a tape-line, both ends of the track marked
     by a broad ribbon of sheeting tied to a papyrus reed. Then,
     proceeding to the eastern or lake end of the track, I dropped the
     earthenware pot, which, after filling, sank, and drew the wooden
     disk level with the water. I noted the chronometer instantly,
     while the boat was rowed away from the scene. The wind from the
     lake blew strong at the time.

     "The board floated from lakeward towards the papyrus eight hundred
     and twenty-two feet in one hour and forty seconds.

     "In the afternoon, wind calm and water tranquil, the disk floated
     in the opposite direction, or towards the lake, one hundred and
     fifty-nine feet in nineteen minutes and thirty seconds, which is at
     the rate of about six hundred feet in the hour.

     "This was of itself conclusive proof that there was no current at
     this date (July 16, 1876). Still I was curious to see the river
     flowing out. The next day, therefore, accompanied by the chief and
     fifteen men of the expedition, we started overland along the banks
     of this rush and mud choked depression for three or four miles. The
     trend of the several streams we passed was from northwest to
     southeast--that is, towards the lake. At Elwani village we came to
     the road from Monyi's, which is used by people proceeding to
     Unguvwa, Luwelezi, or Marungu, on the other side of the Lukuga. Two
     men from the village accompanied us to the Lukuga ford. When we
     reached the foot of the hill we first came to the dry bed of the
     Kibamba. In the rainy season this stream drains the eastern slopes
     of the Kiyanja ridge with a southeast trend. The grass-stalks,
     still lying down from the force of the water, lay with their tops
     pointing lakeward.

     "From the dry mud-bed of the Kibamba to the cane-grass-choked bed
     of Lukuga was but a step. Daring the wet season the Kibamba
     evidently overflowed broadly, and made its way among the matetÃ© of
     the Lukuga.

     "We tramped on along a path leading over prostrate reeds and cane,
     and came at length to where the ground began to be moist. The reeds
     on either side of it rose to the height of ten or twelve feet,
     their tops interlacing, and the stalks, therefore, forming the
     sides of a narrow tunnel. The path sank here and there into
     ditchlike hollows filled with cool water from nine inches to three
     feet deep, with transverse dykes of mud raised above it at
     intervals.

     "Finally, after proceeding some two hundred yards, we came to the
     centre of this reed-covered depression--called by the natives
     "Mitwanzi"--and here the chief, trampling a wider space among the
     reeds, pointed out in triumph water indisputably flowing westward!
     The water felt cold, but it was only 68Â° Fahr., or 7Â° cooler than
     the Lukuga.

     "I am of the opinion, after taking all things into consideration,
     that Kahangwa Cape was, at a remote period, connected with KungwÃ©
     Cape on the east coast--that the Lukuga was the affluent of the
     lake as it stood then, that the lake was at that period at a much
     higher altitude than it is at present, that the northern half of
     the lake is of a later formation, and that, owing to the subsidence
     of that portion and the collapsing of the barrier or the Kahangwa
     Cape and KungwÃ© Cape ridge, the waters south emptied into that of
     the deep gulf north, and left the channel of the Lukuga to be
     employed as the bed of the affluents Kibamba and Lumba, or the
     eastern slope of the Kiyanja ridge, to feed the lake. But now that
     the extension of the profound bed--created by some great
     earthquake, which fractured and disparted the plateau of Uhha,
     Urundi, UbembÃ©, Goma, etc.--is on the eve of being filled up, the
     ancient affluent is about to resume its old duties of conveying the
     surplus waters of the Tanganika down into the valley of the
     Livingstone, and thence, along its majestic winding course, to the
     Atlantic Ocean.

     "At present there are only a few inches of mud-banks and a frail
     barrier of papyrus and reeds to interpose between the waters of the
     lake and its destiny, which it is now, year by year, steadily
     approaching. When the Tanganika has risen three feet higher there
     will be no surf at the mouth of the Lukuga, no sill of sand, no
     oozing mud-banks, no rush-covered old river-course, but the
     accumulated waters of over a hundred rivers will sweep through the
     ancient gap with the force of a cataclysm, bearing away on its
     flood all the deposits of organic _dÃ©bris_ at present in the Lukuga
     Creek down the steep incline to swell the tribute due to the mighty
     Livingstone.

     "On the 21st of July we sailed from the mouth of the future outlet
     Lukuga to the Arab crossing-place near KasengÃ© Island.

     "The Waguha, along whose country we had voyaged for some days, are
     an unusually ceremonious people. They are the first specimens of
     those nations among whom we are destined to travel in our
     exploration of the western regions.

     [Illustration: UBUJWÃ‰ HEAD DRESS.]

     [Illustration: UGUHA HEAD-DRESS.]

     "The art of the coiffeur is better known here than in any portion
     of Africa east of Lake Tanganika. The 'waterfall' and 'back-hair'
     styles are superb, and the constructions are fastened with carved
     wooden or iron pins. Full dress includes a semicircle of finely
     plaited hair over the forehead painted red, ears well ochred, the
     rest of the hair drawn up taut at the back of the head, overlaid
     and secured by a cross-shaped flat board, or with a skeleton-crown
     of iron; the head is then covered with a neatly tasselled and
     plaited grass-cloth, like a lady's breakfast-cap, to protect it
     from dust. In order to protect such an elaborate construction from
     being disordered, they carry a small head-rest of wood stuck in the
     girdle.

     [Illustration: VILLAGE SCENE--DWELLINGS AND GRAIN-HOUSES.]

     "Their mode of salutation is as follows:

     "A man appears before a party seated; he bends, takes up a handful
     of earth or sand with his right hand, and throws a little into his
     left--the left hand rubs the sand or earth over the right elbow and
     the right side of the stomach, while the right hand performs the
     same operation for the left parts of the body, the mouth meanwhile
     uttering rapidly words of salutation. To his inferiors, however,
     the new-comer slaps his hand several times, and after each slap
     lightly taps the region of his heart.

     [Illustration: A WOMAN OF UGUHA.]

     [Illustration: UHYEYA HEAD-DRESS.]

     "On the 28th of July we skirted the low land which lies at the foot
     of the western mountains, and by noon had arrived at the little
     cove in Masansi, near the Rubumba, or the Luvumba, River, at which
     Livingstone and I terminated our exploration of the northern shores
     of Lake Tanganika in 1871. I had thus circumnavigated Lake
     Tanganika from Ujiji up the eastern coast, along the northern head,
     and down the western coast as far as Rubumba River in 1871; and in
     June-July, 1876, had sailed south from Ujiji along the eastern
     coast to the extreme south end of the lake, round each inlet of the
     south, and up the western coast to Panza Point, in Ubwari, round
     the shores of Burton Gulf, and to Rubumba River. The north end of
     the lake was located by Livingstone in south latitude 3Â° 18'; the
     extreme south end I discovered to be in south latitude 8Â° 47',
     which gives it a length of three hundred and twenty-nine
     geographical miles. Its breadth varies from ten to forty-five
     miles, averaging about twenty-eight miles, and its superficial area
     covers a space of nine thousand two hundred and forty square miles.

     [Illustration: SPIRIT ISLAND, LAKE TANGANIKA.]

     "In mid-lake, I sounded, using a three-and-a-half-pound
     sounding-lead with one thousand two hundred and eighty feet of
     cord, and found no bottom. I devoted an hour to this work, and
     tried a second time a mile nearer the Urundi coast, with the same
     results--no bottom. The strain at such a great depth on the
     whip-cord was enormous, but we met with no accident.

     "On the 31st we arrived at Ujiji, after an absence of fifty-one
     days, during which time we had sailed without disaster or illness a
     distance of over eight hundred and ten miles. The entire coast-line
     of the Tanganika is about nine hundred and thirty miles.

     [Illustration: SKETCH NEAR UJIJI.]




CHAPTER VIII.

STANLEY CONTINUES THE READING.--BAD NEWS AT UJIJI.--SMALL-POX AND
ITS RAVAGES.--DESERTIONS BY WHOLESALE.--DEPARTURE OF THE
EXPEDITION.--CROSSING LAKE TANGANIKA.--TRAVELLERS' TROUBLES.--TERRIFYING
RUMORS.--PEOPLE WEST OF THE LAKE.--SINGULAR
HEAD-DRESSES.--CANNIBALISM.--DESCRIPTION OF AN AFRICAN
VILLAGE.--APPEARANCE OF THE INHABITANTS.--IN MANYEMA.--STORY ABOUT
LIVINGSTONE.--MANYEMA HOUSES.--DONKEYS AS CURIOSITIES.--KITETÃ‰ AND HIS
BEARD.--THE LUAMA AND THE LUALABA.--ON THE BANKS OF THE LIVINGSTONE.


Mr. Stanley was heartily applauded as he paused at the end of what we
have recorded in the previous chapter. Under the stimulus of the
applause, and with a reassuring glance at his watch, he continued the
story of his march through the Dark Continent, occasionally reading from
the book, but for the greater portion of the time holding the volume
closed in his hands.

     "The sky was of a stainless blue, and the slumbering lake
     faithfully reflected its exquisite tint, for not a breath of wind
     was astir to vex its surface. With groves of palms and the
     evergreen fig-trees on either hand, and before us a fringe of tall
     cane-grass along the shores, all juicy with verdure, the square
     tembÃ©s of Ugoy and the conical cotes of KawelÃ©, embowered by banana
     and plantain, we emerged into the bay of Ujiji from the channel of
     BangwÃ©.

     "The cheery view of the port lent strength to our arms. An
     animating boat-song was struck up, the sounds of which, carried far
     on the shore, announced that a proud, joyous crew was returning
     homeward.

     "Long-horned cattle are being driven to the water to drink; asses
     are galloping about, braying furiously; goats and sheep and dogs
     are wandering in the market-place--many familiar scenes recur to us
     as we press forward to the shore.

     "Our Wangwana hurry to the beach to welcome us. The usual
     congratulations follow--hand-shakings, smiles, and glad
     expressions. Frank, however, is pale and sickly; a muffler is round
     his neck, and he wears a greatcoat. He looks very different from
     the strong, hearty man to whom I gave the charge of the camp during
     my absence. In a few words he informs me of his sufferings from the
     fever of Ujiji.

     [Illustration: IN COUNCIL: THE COURTYARD OF OUR TEMBÃ‰ AT UJIJI.

     (_From a Photograph by Mr. Stanley._)]

     "'I am so glad you have come, sir. I was beginning to feel very
     depressed. I have been down several times with severe attacks of
     the horrible fever. Yesterday is the first time I got up after
     seven days' weary illness, and people are dying round me so fast
     that I was beginning to think I must soon die too. Now I am all
     right, and shall soon get strong again.'

     [Illustration: CENTRAL AFRICAN GOAT.]

     "The news, when told to me in detail, was grievous. Five of our
     Wangwana were dead from small-pox; six others were seriously ill
     from the same cause. Among the Arab slaves, neither inoculated nor
     vaccinated, the mortality had been excessive from this fearful
     pest.

     "At Rosako, the second camp from Bagamoyo, I had foreseen some such
     event as this, and had vaccinated, as I had thought, all hands; but
     it transpired, on inquiry now, that there were several who had not
     responded to the call, through some silly prejudice against it.
     Five of those unvaccinated were dead, and five were ill, as also
     was one who had received the vaccine. When I examined the
     medicine-chest, I found the tubes broken and the lymph dried up.

     "The Arabs were dismayed at the pest and its dreadful havoc among
     their families and slaves. Every house was full of mourning and
     woe. There were no more agreeable visits and social converse; each
     kept himself in strict seclusion, fearful of being stricken with
     it. Khamis the Baluch was dead, his house was closed, and his
     friends were sorrowing. Mohammed bin Gharib had lost two children;
     Muini Kheri was lamenting the deaths of three children. The
     mortality was increasing; it was now from fifty to seventy-five
     daily among a population of about three thousand. Bitter were the
     complainings against the hot season and close atmosphere, and
     fervent the prayers for rain!

     "Frank had been assiduous in his assistance to our friends. He had
     elevated himself in their opinion by his devotion and sympathy,
     until sickness had laid its heavy hand on him. The Wangwana were
     now his sincere admirers, and the chiefs were his friends.
     Formerly, while ignorant of the language, he and they were, perhaps
     of necessity, mutually distant; they now fraternized warmly.

     "Our messengers had not returned with our letters from UnyanyembÃ©,
     but, to escape the effects of the epidemic, it was necessary to
     move and resume our journey westward. The Wangwana were therefore
     ordered to prepare, and my last letters were written; but, though I
     hoped to be ready on the 17th to strike camp, I was attacked by a
     serious fever. This delayed me until the evening of the 25th.

     "When, on the morning of the 25th of August, the drum and bugle
     announced that our travels were to be resumed, I had cause to
     congratulate myself that I had foreseen that many desertions would
     take place, and that I was prepared in a measure for it by having
     discarded many superfluities. But I was not prepared to hear that
     thirty-eight men had deserted. Thirty-eight out of one hundred and
     seventy was a serious reduction of strength. I was also told by the
     chiefs of the expedition, who were almost beside themselves with
     fear, that this wholesale desertion threatened an entire and
     complete dissolution of our force; that many more would desert _en
     route_ to Kabogo, as the people were demoralized by the prospect of
     being eaten by Manyema cannibals. As neither Frank nor I relished
     the idea of being compelled to return to Zanzibar before we had
     obtained a view of the Lualaba, I mustered as many as would answer
     to their names; and out of these, selecting such as appeared
     unstable and flighty, I secured thirty-two, and surrounded our
     house with guards.

     [Illustration: M'SEHAZY HAVEN AND CAMP, AT THE MOUTH OF M'SEHAZY
     RIVER.]

     "After preparing the canoes and getting the boat ready, those who
     did not bear a good character for firmness and fidelity were
     conducted under guard to the transport canoes; the firm and
     faithful, and those believed to be so, were permitted to march on
     land with myself towards Kabogo Cape, or M'sehazy Creek, whence the
     crossing of the Tanganika was to be effected. Out of the one
     hundred and thirty-two men, of whom the expedition now consisted,
     only thirty were intrusted with guns, as my faith in the stability
     of the Wangwana was utterly destroyed, despite their protestations
     to the contrary. I could afford to lose weak, fearful, and unworthy
     men; but I could not afford to lose one gun. Though we had such a
     show of strength left, I was only too conscious that there were
     barely forty reliable and effective in a crisis, or in the presence
     of danger; the rest were merely useful as bearers of burdens, or
     porters.

     "When we resumed our journey the second day from Ukaranga, three
     more were missing, which swelled the number of desertions to
     forty-one, and reduced our force to one hundred and twenty-nine.
     After we had crossed the Tanganika and arrived in Uguha, two more
     disappeared, one of whom was young Kalulu, whom I had taken to
     England and the United States, and whom I had placed in an English
     school for eighteen months.

     "Induced to do so by the hope that I should secure their attachment
     to the cause of the expedition, I had purchased from Sultan bin
     Kassim six bales of cloth at an enormous price, Â£350, and had
     distributed them all among the people gratuitously. This wholesale
     desertion, at the very period when their services were about to be
     most needed, was my reward! The desertion and faithless conduct of
     Kalulu did not, as may be imagined, augment my hopes, or increase
     my faith in the fidelity of my people. But it determined me to
     recover some of the deserters. Francis Pocock and the detective of
     the expedition, the ever faithful and gallant KachÃ©chÃ©, were
     therefore sent back with a squad to Ujiji, with instructions how to
     act; and one night KachÃ©chÃ© pounced upon six fellows, who, after a
     hard and tough resistance, were secured; and after his return to
     Uguha with these he successfully recovered the runaway Kalulu on
     KasengÃ© Island. These seven, along with a few others arrested in
     the act of desertion, received merited punishments, which put an
     end to misconduct and faithlessness, and prevented the wreck of the
     expedition.

     "It must not be supposed that I was more unfortunate than other
     travellers; for to the faithlessness of his people may be
     attributed principally the long wanderings of poor Livingstone.
     Cameron also lost a great number at UnyanyembÃ©, as well as at
     Ujiji. Experience had taught me on my first journey to Central
     Africa that Wangwana would desert at every opportunity, especially
     in the vicinity of the Arab depots. It was to lessen these
     opportunities for desertion that I had left the UnyanyembÃ© road,
     and struck through Ituru and Iramba; and though my losses in men
     were great from famine, the ferocity of the natives, and sickness,
     they did not amount to half of what they certainly would have been
     had I touched at UnyanyembÃ©. By adopting this route, despite the
     calamities that we were subjected to for a short season, I had
     gained time, and opened new countries hitherto unexplored.

     "Unless the traveller in Africa exerts himself to keep his force
     intact, he cannot hope to perform satisfactory service. If he
     relaxes his watchfulness, it is instantly taken advantage of by the
     weak-minded and the indolent. Livingstone lost at least six years
     of time, and finally his life, by permitting his people to desert.
     If a follower left his service, he even permitted him to remain in
     the same village with him, without attempting to reclaim him, or to
     compel that service which he had bound himself to render at
     Zanzibar. The consequence of this excessive mildness was that he
     was left at last with only seven men, out of nearly seventy. His
     noble character has won from us a tribute of affection and esteem,
     but it has had no lasting good effect on the African. At the same
     time, over-severity is as bad as over-gentleness in dealing with
     these men. What is required is pure, simple justice between man and
     man.

     [Illustration: HUTS AND STORE-HOUSE.]

     "The general infidelity and instability of the Wangwana arises, in
     great part, from their weak minds becoming a prey to terror of
     imaginary dangers. Thus, the Johanna men deserted Livingstone
     because they heard the terrible MafittÃ© were in the way; my
     runaways of Ujiji fled from the danger of being eaten by the
     Manyema.

     "The slaves of Sungoro, the coast trader at Kagehyi, Usukuma,
     informed my people that Lake Victoria spread as far as the Salt
     Sea, that it had no end, and that the people on its shores loved
     the flesh of man better than that of goats. This foolish report
     made it a most difficult matter to man the exploring boat, and over
     a hundred swore by Allah that they knew nothing of rowing.

     "A similar scene took place when about to circumnavigate the
     Tanganika, for the Arab slaves had spread such reports of Muzimus,
     hobgoblins, fiery meteors, terrible spirits, such as Kabogo,
     Katavi, Kateye, and WanpembÃ©, that the teeth of Wanyamwezi and
     Wangwana chattered with fright. But no reports exercised such a
     terrible effect on their weak minds as the report of the Manyema
     cannibals; none were so greedily listened to, none more readily
     believed.

     "The path which traders and their caravans follow to Manyema begins
     at Mtowa, in Uguha, and, continuing south a few miles over a series
     of hills, descends into the plain of the Rugumba River about
     half-way between the Lukuga River and the traders' crossing-place.

     "The conduct of the first natives to whom we were introduced
     pleased us all. They showed themselves in a very amiable light,
     sold their corn cheaply and without fuss, behaved themselves
     decently and with propriety, though their principal men,
     entertaining very strange ideas of the white men, carefully
     concealed themselves from view, and refused to be tempted to
     expose themselves within view or hearing of us.

     [Illustration: SUB-CHIEF, WEST OF LAKE TANGANIKA.]

     "Their doubts of our character were reported to us by a friendly
     young Arab as follows: 'Kassanga, chief of Ruanda, says, "How can
     the white men be good when they come for no trade, whose feet one
     never sees, who always go covered from head to foot with clothes?
     Do not tell me they are good and friendly. There is something very
     mysterious about them; perhaps wicked. Probably they are magicians;
     at any rate, it is better to leave them alone, and to keep close
     until they are gone."'

     "From Ruanda, where we halted only for a day, we began in earnest
     the journey to Manyema, thankful that the Tanganika was safely
     crossed, and that the expedition had lost no more of its strength.

     "On the third day, after gradually ascending to a height of eight
     hundred feet above the lake, across a series of low hilly ridges
     and scantily wooded valleys, which abound with buffalo, we reached
     the crest of a range which divides the tributaries of the Lualaba
     from those of Lake Tanganika. This range also serves as a boundary
     between Uguha and UbujwÃ©, a country adjoining the former
     northwesterly. The western portions of Uguha, and southeastern
     UbujwÃ©, are remarkable for their forests of fruit-trees, of which
     there are several varieties, called the Masuku, Mbembu (or
     wood-apple), SingwÃ© (wild African damson), the Matonga (or
     nux-vomica), custard-apple, etc. A large quantity of honey was also
     obtained; indeed, an army might subsist for many weeks in this
     forest on the various luscious fruits it contains. Our people
     feasted on them, as also on the honey and buffalo meat which I was
     fortunate in obtaining.

     [Illustration: HEADS OF MEN OF MANYEMA.]

     "Our acquaintance with the WabujwÃ© commenced at Lambo, or
     Mulolwa's, situated at the confluence of the Rugumba with the
     Rubumba. In these people we first saw the mild, amiable,
     unsophisticated innocence of this part of Central Africa, and their
     behavior was exactly the reverse of the wild, ferocious,
     cannibalistic races the Arabs had described to us.

     "From our experience of them, the natives of Rua, Uguha, and UbujwÃ©
     appear to be the _Ã©lite_ of the hair-dressed fashionables of
     Africa. Hair-dressing is, indeed, carried to an absurd perfection
     throughout all this region, and among the various styles I have
     seen, some are surpassing in taste and neatness, and almost
     pathetic from the carefulness with which poor, wild nature has done
     its best to decorate itself.

     [Illustration: NATIVES OF UBUJWÃ‰.]

     "The Waguha and WabujwÃ©, among other characteristics, are very
     partial to the arts of sculpture and turning. They carve statues in
     wood, which they set up in their villages. Their house doors often
     exhibit carvings resembling the human face; and the trees in the
     forest between the two countries frequently present specimens of
     their ingenuity in this art. Some have also been seen to wear
     wooden medals, whereon a rough caricature of a man's features was
     represented. At every village in UbujwÃ© excellent wooden bowls and
     basins of a very light wood (RubiaceÃ¦), painted red, are offered
     for sale.

     "Beyond Kundi our journey lay across chains of hills, of a conical
     or rounded form, which enclosed many basins or valleys. While the
     Rugumba, or Rubumba, flows northwesterly to the east of Kundi, as
     far as Kizambala on the Luama River, we were daily, sometimes
     hourly, fording or crossing the tributaries of the Luama.

     [Illustration: A NATIVE OF UHYEYA.]

     "Adjoining UbujwÃ© is Uhyeya, inhabited by a tribe who are decidedly
     a scale lower in humanity than their ingenious neighbors. What
     little merit they possess seems to have been derived from commerce
     with the WabujwÃ©. The Wahyeya are also partial to ochre, black
     paints, and a composition of black mud, which they mould into the
     form of a plate, and attach to the back part of the head. Their
     upper teeth are filed, 'out of regard to custom,' they say, and not
     from any taste for human flesh.

     "When questioned as to whether it was their custom to eat of the
     flesh of people slain in battle, they were positive in their
     denial, and protested great repugnance to such a diet, though they
     eat the flesh of all animals except that of dogs.

     "Simple and dirt-loving as these poor people were, they were
     admirable for the readiness with which they supplied all our wants,
     voluntarily offering themselves, moreover, as guides to lead us to
     Uvinza, the next country we had to traverse.

     "Uvinza now seems to be nothing more than a name of a small
     district which occupies a small basin of some few miles square. At
     a former period it was very populous, as the many ruined villages
     we passed through proved. The slave-traders, when not manfully
     resisted, leave broad traces wherever they go.

     [Illustration: ONE OF THE WAHYEYA OF UHOMBO.

     (BACK VIEW.)]

     "A very long march from KagongwÃ© in Uvinza brought us to the
     pleasant basin of Uhombo, remarkable for its fertility, its groves
     of Guinea-palms, and its beauty. This basin is about six miles
     square, but within this space there is scarcely a two-acre plot of
     level ground to be seen. The whole forms a picture of hilltops,
     slopes, valleys, hollows, and intersecting ridges in happy
     diversity. Myriads of cool, clear streams course through, in time
     united by the Lubangi into a pretty little river, flowing westerly
     to the Luama. It was the most delightful spot that we had seen. As
     the people were amiable, and disposed to trade, we had soon an
     abundance of palm-butter for cooking, sugar-cane, fine goats and
     fat chickens, sweet potatoes, beans, pease, nuts, and manioc,
     millet and other grain for flour, ripe bananas for dessert,
     plantain and palm wines for cheer, and an abundance of soft, cool,
     clear water to drink!

     [Illustration: A VALLEY AMONG THE HILLS.]

     "Subsequently we had many such pleasant experiences; but as it was
     the first, it deserves a more detailed description.

     "Travellers from Africa have often written about African villages,
     yet I am sure few of those at home have ever comprehended the
     reality. I now propose to lay it before them in this sketch of a
     village in the district of Uhombo. The village consists of a number
     of low, conical grass huts, ranged round a circular common, in the
     centre of which are three or four fig-trees, kept for the double
     purpose of supplying shade to the community, and bark-cloth to the
     chief. The doorways to the huts are very low, scarcely thirty
     inches high. The common fenced round by the grass huts shows
     plainly the ochreous color of the soil, and it is so well trodden
     that not a grass blade thrives upon it.

     [Illustration: GOING A-FISHING.]

     "On presenting myself in the common, I attracted out of doors the
     owners and ordinary inhabitants of each hut, until I found myself
     the centre of quite a promiscuous population of men, women,
     children, and infants. Though I had appeared here for the purpose
     of studying the people of Uhombo, and making a treaty of friendship
     with the chief, the villagers seemed to think I had come merely to
     make a free exhibition of myself as some natural monstrosity.

     "I saw before me over a hundred beings of the most degraded,
     unpresentable type it is possible to conceive, and though I knew
     quite well that some thousands of years ago the beginning of this
     wretched humanity and myself were one and the same, a sneaking
     disinclination to believe it possessed me strongly, and I would
     even now willingly subscribe some small amount of silver money for
     him who could but assist me to controvert the discreditable fact.

     "But common-sense tells me not to take into undue consideration
     their squalor, their ugliness, or nakedness, but to gauge their
     true position among the human race by taking a view of the
     cultivated fields and gardens of Uhombo, and I am compelled to
     admit that these debased specimens of humanity only plant and sow
     such vegetables and grain as I myself should cultivate were I
     compelled to provide for my own sustenance. I see, too, that their
     huts, though of grass, are almost as well made as the materials
     will permit, and, indeed, I have often slept in worse. Speak with
     them in their own dialect of the law of _meum_ and _tuum_, and it
     will soon appear that they are intelligent enough upon that point.
     Moreover, the muscles, tissues, and fibres of their bodies, and all
     the organs of sight, hearing, smell, or motion, are as well
     developed as in us. Only in taste and judgment, based upon larger
     experience, in the power of expression, in morals and intellectual
     culture, are we superior.

     "I strive, therefore, to interest myself in my gross and
     rudely-shaped brothers and sisters. Almost bursting into a laugh at
     the absurdity, I turn towards an individual whose age marks him out
     as one to whom respect is due, and say to him, after the common
     manner of greeting:

     "My brother, sit you down by me on this mat, and let us be friendly
     and sociable and as I say it I thrust into his wide-open hand
     twenty cowries, the currency of the land. One look at his hand as
     he extended it, made me think I could carve a better-looking hand
     out of a piece of rhinoceros-hide.

     "While speaking I look at his face, which is like an ugly and
     extravagant mask, clumsily manufactured from some strange,
     dark-brown, coarse material. The lips proved the thickness of skin
     which nature had endowed him with, and by the obstinacy with which
     they refused to meet each other the form of the mouth was but
     ill-defined, though capacious and garnished with its full
     complement of well-preserved teeth.

     "His nose was so flat that I inquired in a perfectly innocent
     manner as to the reason for such a feature.

     [Illustration: VILLAGE FORGE AND IDOL.]

     "'Ah,' said he, with a sly laugh, 'it is the fault of my mother,
     who, when I was young, bound me too tight to her back.'

     "His hair had been compelled to obey the capricious fashion of his
     country, and was therefore worked up into furrows and ridges and
     central cones, bearing a curious resemblance to the formation of
     the land around Uhombo. I wonder if the art grew by perceiving
     nature's fashion and mould of his country?

     "Descending from the face, which, crude, large-featured, rough-hewn
     as it was, bore witness to the possession of much sly humor and a
     kindly disposition, my eyes fastened on his naked body. Through the
     ochreous daubs I detected strange freaks of pricking on it, circles
     and squares and crosses, and traced with wonder the many hard lines
     and puckers created by age, weather, ill-usage, and rude keeping.

     "His feet were monstrous abortions, with soles as hard as hoofs,
     and his legs, as high up as the knees, were plastered with
     successive strata of dirt; his loin-cover or the queer 'girding
     tackle' need not be described. They were absolutely appalling to
     good taste, and the most ragged British beggar or Neapolitan
     lazzarone is sumptuously, nay, regally, clothed in comparison to
     this 'king' in Uhombo.

     "If the old chief appeared so unprepossessing, how can I paint
     without offence my humbler brothers and sisters who stood round us?
     As I looked at the array of faces, I could only comment to
     myself--ugly--uglier--ugliest.

     "And what shall I say of the hideous and queer appendages that they
     wear about their waists; the tags of monkey-skin, and bits of
     gorilla-bone, goat-horn, shells--strange tags to stranger tackle?
     and of the things around their necks--brain of mice, skin of viper,
     'adder's fork, and blind worm's sting?' And how strangely they
     smell, all these queer, manlike creatures who stand regarding me!
     Not silently; on the contrary, there is a loud interchange of
     comments upon the white's appearance; a manifestation of broad
     interest to know whence I come, whither I am going, and what is my
     business. And no sooner are the questions asked than they are
     replied to by such as pretend to know. The replies were followed by
     long-drawn ejaculations of 'Wa-a-a-antu!' ('Men!') 'Eha-a, and
     these are men!'

     "Now imagine this! While we whites are loftily disputing among
     ourselves as to whether the beings before us are human, here were
     these creatures actually expressing strong doubts as to whether we
     whites are men!

     [Illustration: READY FOR FIGHTING.]

     "A dead silence prevailed for a short time, during which all the
     females dropped their lower jaws far down, and then cried out again
     'Wa-a-a-a-a-antu!' ('Men!') The lower jaws, indeed, dropped so low
     that, when, in a posture of reflection, they put their hands up to
     their chins, it really looked as if they had done so to lift the
     jaws up to their proper place and to sustain them there. And in
     that position they pondered upon the fact that there were men
     'white all over' in this queer, queer world!

     "The open mouths gave one a chance to note the healthy state and
     ruby color of the tongues, palates, and gums, and, above all, the
     admirable order and brilliant whiteness of each set of teeth.

     "'Great events from trivial causes spring'--and while I was trying
     to calculate how many Kubaba (measure of two pounds) of millet-seed
     would be requisite to fill all these hutch-oven mouths, and how
     many cowries would be required to pay for such a large quantity of
     millet, and wondering at the antics of the juveniles of the
     population, whose uncontainable, irrepressible wonder seemed to
     find its natural expression in hopping on one leg, thrusting their
     right thumbs into their mouths to repress the rising scream, and
     slapping their thighs to express or give emphasis to what was
     speechless--while thus engaged, and just thinking it was time to
     depart, it happened that one of the youthful innocents already
     described, more restless than his brothers, stumbled across a long,
     heavy pole which was leaning insecurely against one of the trees.
     The pole fell, striking one of my men severely on the head. And all
     at once there went up from the women a genuine and unaffected cry
     of pity, and their faces expressed so lively a sense of tender
     sympathy with the wounded man, that my heart, keener than my eyes,
     saw, through the disguise of filth, nakedness, and ochre, the human
     heart beating for another's suffering, and I then recognized and
     hailed them as indeed my own poor and degraded sisters.

     "Under the new light which had dawned on me, I reflected that I had
     done some wrong to my dusky relatives, and that they might have
     been described less harshly, and introduced to the world with less
     disdain.

     "Before I quitted the village they made me still more regret my
     former haughty feelings, for the chief and his subjects loaded my
     men with bounties of bananas, chickens, Indian corn, and malafu
     (palm-wine), and escorted me respectfully far beyond the precincts
     of the village and their fields, parting from me at last with the
     assurance that, should I ever happen to return by their country,
     they would endeavor to make my second visit to Uhombo much more
     agreeable than my first had been.

     "On the 5th of October our march from Uhombo brought us to the
     frontier village of Manyema, which is called Riba-Riba. It is
     noteworthy as the starting-point of another order of African
     architecture. The conical style of hut is exchanged for the square
     hut with more gradually-sloping roof, wattled, and sometimes neatly
     plastered with mud; especially those in Manyema. Here, too, the
     thin-bodied and long-limbed goat, to which we had been accustomed,
     gave place to the short-legged, large bodied, and capacious-uddered
     variety of Manyema. The gray parrots with crimson tails here also
     first began to abound, and the hoarse growl of the fierce and shy
     'soko' (gorilla?) was first heard.

     "From the day we cross the watershed that divides the affluents of
     the Tanganika from the head-waters of the Luama, there is observed
     a gradual increase in the splendor of Nature. By slow degrees she
     exhibits to us, as we journey westward, her rarest beauties, her
     wealth, and all the profligacy of her vegetation. In the forests of
     Miketo, and on the western slopes of the Goma Mountains, she
     scatters with liberal hand her luxuries of fruits, and along the
     banks of streams we see revealed the wild profusion of her
     bounties.

     "As we increase the distance from the Tanganika we find the land
     disposed in graceful lines and curves; ridges heave up, separating
     valley from valley, hills lift their heads in the midst of the
     basins and mountain-ranges, at greater distances apart, bound wide
     prospects, wherein the lesser hill-chains, albeit of dignified
     proportions, appear but as agreeable diversities of scenery.

     "Over the whole, Nature has flung a robe of verdure of the most
     fervid tints. She has bidden the mountains loose their streamlets,
     has commanded the hills and ridges to bloom, filled the valleys
     with vegetation breathing perfume; for the rocks she has woven
     garlands of creepers, and the stems of trees she has draped with
     moss; and sterility she has banished from her domain.

     "Yet Nature has not produced a soft, velvety, smiling England in
     the midst of Africa. Far from it. She is here too robust and
     prolific. Her grasses are coarse, and wound like knives and
     needles; her reeds are tough and tall as bamboos; her creepers and
     convolvuli are of cable thickness and length; her thorns are books
     of steel; her trees shoot up to a height of a hundred feet. We find
     no pleasure in straying in search of wild-flowers, and game is left
     undisturbed, because of the difficulty of moving about, for, once
     the path is left, we find ourselves over head among thick, tough,
     unyielding, lacerating grass.

     "At Manyema the beauty of Nature becomes terrible, and in the
     expression of her powers she is awful. The language of Swahili has
     words to paint her in every mood. English, rich as it is, is found
     insufficient. In the former we have the word Pori for a forest, an
     ordinary thickly-wooded tract; but for the forests of Manyema it
     has four special words--Mohuro, Mwitu, Mtambani, and Msitu. For
     Mohuro we might employ the words jungly forest; for Mwitu, dense
     woods; but for Msitu and Mtambani we have no single equivalent, nor
     could we express their full meaning without a series of epithets
     ending with 'tangled jungle' or 'impervious underwood, in the midst
     of a dense forest'--for such is in reality the nature of a Manyema
     Msitu.

     "I am of opinion that Manyema owes its fertility to the mountains
     west of the Tanganika, which by their altitude suddenly cool and
     liquefy the vapors driven over their tops by the southeast monsoon;
     for while Uguha west was robed in green, its lake front was black
     with the ashes of burned grass.

     "We left Riba-Riba's old chief, and his numerous progeny of boys
     and girls, and his wonderful subjects, encamped on their
     mountain-top, and journeyed on with rapid pace through tall
     forests, and along the crests of wooded ridges, down into the
     depths of gloomy dingles, and up again to daylight into view of
     sweeping circles of bearded ridges and solemn woods, to
     Ka-BambarrÃ©.

     [Illustration: AFRICAN OWLS.]

     "Even though this place had no other associations, it would be
     attractive and alluring for its innocent wildness; but, associated
     as it is with Livingstone's sufferings, and that self-sacrificing
     life he led here, I needed only to hear from Mwana Ngoy, son of
     Mwana Kusu,[7] 'Yes, this is the place where the old white man
     stopped for many moons,' to make up my mind to halt.

     [7] Mwana, _lord_; Kusu, _parrot_.

     [Illustration: A VILLAGE IN MANYEMA.]

     "'Ah! he lived here, did he?'

     "'Yes.'

     "By this time the population of Ka-BambarrÃ©, seeing their chief in
     conversation with the white stranger, had drawn round us under a
     palm-tree, and mats were spread for us to seat ourselves.

     "'Did you know the old white man? Was he your father?'

     "'He was not my father; but I knew him well.'

     "'Eh, do you hear that?' he asked his people. 'He says he knew him.
     Was he not a good man?'

     "'Yes; very good.'

     "'You say well. He was good to me, and he saved me from the Arabs
     many a time. The Arabs are hard men, and often he would step
     between them and me when they were hard on me. He was a good man,
     and my children were fond of him. I hear he is dead?'

     "'Yes, he is dead.'

     "'Where has he gone to?'

     "'Above, my friend,' said I, pointing to the sky.

     "'Ah,' said he, breathlessly, and looking up, 'did he come from
     above?'

     "'No; but good men like him go above when they die.'

     "We had many conversations about him. The sons showed me the house
     he had lived in for a long time, when prevented from further
     wandering by the ulcers in his feet. In the village his memory is
     cherished, and will be cherished forever.

     "It was strange what a sudden improvement in the physiognomy of the
     native had occurred. In the district of Uhombo we had seen a truly
     debased negro type. Here we saw people of the Ethiopic negro type,
     worthy to rank next the more refined Waganda. Mwana Ngoy himself
     was nothing very remarkable. Age had deprived him of his good
     looks; but there were about him some exceedingly pretty women, with
     winsome ways about them that were quite charming.

     [Illustration: A YOUTH OF EAST MAMYEMA.]

     [Illustration: A MANYEMA ADULT.]

     "Mwana Ngoy, I suppose, is one of the vainest of vain men. I fancy
     I can see him now, strutting about his village with his sceptral
     staff, an amplitude of grass-cloth about him, which, when measured,
     gives exactly twenty-four square yards, drawn in double folds
     about his waist, all tags, tassels, and fringes, and painted in
     various colors, bronze and black and white and yellow, and on his
     head a plumy head-dress.

     [Illustration: THE VALLEY OF MABARO.]

     "What charms lurk in feathers! From the grand British dowager down
     to Mwana Ngoy of Ka-BambarrÃ©, all admit the fascination of
     feathers, whether plucked from ostriches or barn-door fowl.

     "Mwana Ngoy's plumes were the tribute of the village chanticleers,
     and his vanity was so excited at the rustle of his feathered crest
     that he protruded his stomach to such a distance that his head was
     many degrees from the perpendicular.

     "On the 10th of October we arrived at Kizambala, presided over by
     another chief called Mwana Ngoy, a relative of him of Ka-BambarrÃ©.

     "Up to this date we had seen some twenty villages, and probably
     four thousand natives, of Manyema, and may therefore be permitted
     some generalizations.

     "The Manyema, then, have several noteworthy peculiarities. Their
     arms are a short sword scabbarded with wood, to which are hung
     small brass and iron bells, a light, beautifully balanced
     spear--probably, next to the spear of Uganda, the most perfect in
     the world. Their shields were veritable wooden doors. Their dress
     consisted of a narrow apron of antelope-skin, or finely-made
     grass-cloth. They wore knobs, cones, and patches of mud attached to
     their beards, back hair, and behind the ears. Old Mwana Ngoy had
     rolled his beard in a ball of dark mud; his children wore their
     hair in braids, with mud fringes. His drummer had a great
     crescent-shaped patch of mud at the back of the head. At Kizambala
     the natives had horns and cones of mud on the tops of their heads.
     Others, more ambitious, covered the entire head with a crown of
     mud.

     "The women, blessed with an abundance of hair, manufactured it with
     a stiffening of light cane into a bonnet-shaped head-dress,
     allowing the back hair to flow down to the waist in masses of
     ringlets. They seemed to do all the work of life, for at all hours
     they might be seen, with their large wicker baskets behind them,
     setting out for the rivers or creeks to catch fish, or returning
     with their fuel baskets strapped on across their foreheads.

     [Illustration: A YOUNG WOMAN OF EAST MANYEMA.]

     "Their villages consist of one or more broad streets, from one
     hundred to one hundred and fifty feet wide, flanked by low, square
     huts, arranged in tolerably straight lines, and generally situated
     on swells of land, to secure rapid drainage. At the end of one of
     these streets is the council and gossip house, overlooking the
     length of the avenue. In the centre is a platform of tamped clay,
     with a heavy tree-trunk sunk into it, and in the wood have been
     scooped out a number of troughs, so that several women may pound
     grain at once. It is a substitute for the village mill.

     "The houses are separated into two or more apartments, and on
     account of the compact nature of the clay and tamped floor are
     easily kept clean. The roofs are slimy with the reek of smoke, as
     though they had been painted with coal-tar. The household
     chattels or furniture are limited to food-baskets, earthenware
     pots, an assortment of wickerwork dishes, the family shields,
     spears, knives, swords, and tools, and the fish-baskets lying
     outside.

     [Illustration: VILLAGE SCENE IN SOUTHEAST MANYEMA.]

     "They are tolerably hospitable, and permit strangers the free use
     of their dwellings. The bananas and plantains are very luxuriant,
     while the Guinea palms supply the people with oil and wine; the
     forests give them fuel, the rivers fish, and the gardens cassava,
     ground-nuts, and Indian corn.

     "The chiefs enact strict laws, and, though possessed of but little
     actual power either of wealth or retinue, exact the utmost
     deference, and are exceedingly ceremonious, being always followed
     by a drummer, who taps his drum with masterly skill born of long
     and continued practice.

     "On the 11th we crossed the Luama River--a stream two hundred yards
     wide and eight feet deep in the centre at the ferry--called the
     Rugumba in UbujwÃ©. Below the ford, as far as the Lualaba, its
     current is from three to six knots an hour, and about five feet
     deep, flowing over a shaly bed.

     "On the western side of the Luama the women at once fled upon the
     approach of our caravan--a certain sign that there had been trouble
     between them and Arabs.

     "My predecessors, Livingstone and Cameron, had, after crossing the
     stream, proceeded west, but I preferred to follow the Luama to its
     junction with the Lualaba, and thence to NyangwÃ©.

     "The Luama valley is about twenty miles wide, furrowed with many
     water-courses; the soil is poor, abounding with yellow quartz, but
     resting upon soft shale. The ridges are formed of dykes of granite,
     which peep out frequently in large masses from among the foliage of
     trees.

     "The people appeared to be very timid, but behaved amiably. Over
     fifty followed us, and carried loads most willingly. Three
     volunteered to follow us wherever we should go, but we declined
     their offer.

     "Our riding-donkeys were the first ever seen in Manyema, and
     effected a striking demonstration in our favor. They obtained more
     admiration than even we Europeans. Hundreds of natives ran up to us
     at each village in the greatest excitement to behold the strange,
     long-eared animals, and followed us long distances from their homes
     to observe the donkeys' motions.

     "One donkey, known by the name of Muscati, a high-spirited animal
     from Arabia, possessed braying powers which almost equalled the
     roar of a lion in volume, and really appeared to enjoy immensely
     the admiration he excited. His asinine soul took great delight in
     braying at the unsophisticated Africans of the trans-Luama, for his
     bray sent them flying in all directions. Scores of times during a
     day's march we were asked the name of the beast, and, having
     learned it, they were never tired of talking about the 'Mpunda.'

     "One must not rashly impute all the blame to the Arabs and
     Wa-Swahili of the Zanzibar coast for their excesses in Manyema, for
     the natives are also in a way to blame. Just as the Saxon and Dane
     and Jute, invited by the Britons, became their masters, so the
     Arabs, invited by the Manyema to assist them against one another,
     have become their tyrants.

     [Illustration: HOUSE OF AN ARAB MERCHANT, CENTRAL AFRICA.]

     "Bribes were offered to us three times by Manyema chiefs to assist
     them in destroying their neighbors, to whom they are of near kin,
     and with whom they have almost daily intimate relations. Our
     refusal of ivory and slaves appeared to surprise the chiefs, and
     they expressed the opinion that we white men were not as good as
     the Arabs, for--though it was true we did not rob them of their
     wives and daughters, enslave their sons, or despoil them of a
     single article--the Arabs would have assisted them.

     [Illustration: HOUSE OF A MANYEMA CHIEF.]

     "One really does not know whether to pity or to despise the natives
     of Manyema. Many are amiable enough to deserve good and kind
     treatment, but others are hardly human. They fly to the woods upon
     the approach of strangers, leaving their granaries[8] of Indian
     corn, erected like screens across the streets, or just outside the
     villages, in tempting view of hungry people. If the strangers
     follow them into the woods to persuade them to return and sell
     food, the purpose of the visit is mistaken, and they are assailed
     from behind depths of bush and tall trees. They are humble and
     liberal to the strong-armed Arab, savage and murderous and
     cannibalistic to small bands, and every slain man provides a
     banquet of meat for the forest-natives of Manyema. Livingstone's
     uniform gentle treatment of all classes deserved a better return
     than to have his life attempted four times. His patience finally
     exhausted, and his life in danger, he gave the order to his men,
     'Fire upon them, these men are wicked.'

     [8] These granaries consist of tall poles--like telegraph
     poles--planted at a distance of about ten feet from each other, to
     which are attached about a dozen lines of lliane, or creepers, at
     intervals, from top to bottom. On these several lines are suspended
     the maize, point downwards, by the shucks of the cob. Their
     appearance suggests lofty screens built up of corn.

     "On the 13th, after a march of thirteen miles in a west-southwest
     direction, along a very crooked path, we arrived at KabungwÃ©.

     "At this settlement we observed for the first time spears all of
     wood, having their points sharp and hardened in fire and shafts
     eight to ten feet long. As each warrior possesses a sheaf of these
     weapons, besides a vast wooden shield, he is sufficiently armed
     against a native enemy, and might, by a little boldness, become a
     dangerous foe to an Arab.

     "The currency throughout Manyema consists of cowries. Six cowries
     formed the ration money of the Wangwana, three cowries purchased a
     chicken, two procured ten maize-ears, one cowrie obtained the
     service of a native to grind the grain, two cowries were a day's
     hire for a porter; so that the Wangwana and Wanyamwezi were
     enjoying both abundance and relief from labor while we were
     travelling through Manyema.

     "At KabungwÃ© I was alarmed at an insufferable odor that pervaded
     the air we breathed, for, whether in the house or without, the
     atmosphere seemed loaded with an intolerable stench. On inquiring
     of the natives whether there was any dead animal putrefying in the
     neighborhood, they pointed to the firewood that was burning, and to
     a tree--a species of laurel--as that which emitted the smell. Upon
     examination I found it was indeed due to this strange wood, which,
     however, only becomes offensive under the action of fire.

     "Between KabungwÃ© and Mtuyu, our next camp, the country is
     extremely populous. Were all the villages we passed inhabited by
     brave men, a brigade of European troops could not move without
     precaution. The people, however, did not attempt to molest us,
     though an enormous number came out to stare at us and our donkeys.

     "The natives are quick to adopt nicknames. In some places the Arabs
     were known by the name of Mwana NgombÃ©, 'lords of cows.'

     "The Sarmeen of my first expedition received from his comrades, for
     his detective qualities, the name of KachÃ©chÃ©, or the 'weasel.'

     "Sambuzi received the title of Mta-uza, or the 'spoiler;' and one
     of his subordinates was called Kiswaga, or 'fleet-foot.'

     "Kalulu's name was formerly Ndugu Mali, 'brother of money.'

     "Wadi Safeni had a young relative in the expedition entitled Akili
     Mali, or 'one who is wise with his money.'

     "In the same manner countries receive appellations distinctive of
     peculiarities, such as,

  Unya-NyembÃ©, land of hoes.
  U-Yofu, land of elephants.
  Unya-Mbewa, land of goats.
  Unya-Nkondo, land of sheep.
  U-Konongo, land of travellers.
  Unya-NguruwÃ©, land of hogs.
  U-Nguru, land of mountains.
  U-Kusu, land of parrots.
  U-Ganda, land of drums.
  U-Lungu or U-Rungu, plain land.
  Ma-Rungu, plateau land.
  U-Kutu, land of ears (long ears?).
  U-Karanga, land of ground nuts.
  U-Lua, or U-Rua, land of lakes.
  U-Emba, lake land.
  U-Bwari, land of food.

     "Mtuyu is the easternmost settlement of the country of Uzura. On
     arrival we perceived that all their women were absent, and
     naturally inquired what had become of them. They replied, in
     pathetic strains, 'Oh, they are all dead; all cut off, every one.
     It was the small-pox!'

     "We sympathized with them, of course, because of such a terrible
     loss, and attempted to express our concern. But one of our
     enterprising people, while endeavoring to search out a good market
     for his cowries, discovered several dozen of the women in a wooded
     ravine! They had been concealed under the supposition that we were
     slave-hunters.

     "Skirting the range of hills which bounds the Luama valley on the
     north, we marched to Mpungu, which is fifteen miles west of Mtuyu.
     KitetÃ©, its chief, is remarkable for a plaited beard twenty inches
     long, decorated at the tips with a number of blue glass beads. His
     hair was also trussed up on the crown of his head in a shapely
     mass. His brother possessed a beard six inches long; there were
     half a dozen others with beards of three or four inches long.
     KitetÃ©'s symbol of royalty was a huge truncheon, or Hercules club,
     blackened and hardened by fire. His village was neat, and the
     architecture of the huts peculiar, as the picture below shows.

     [Illustration: KITETÃ‰, THE CHIEF OF MPUNGU.]

     "The Luama valley at Uzura at this season presents a waving extent
     of grass-grown downs, and while crossing over the higher swells of
     land we enjoyed uninterrupted views of thirty or forty miles to the
     west and south.

     [Illustration: VILLAGE NEAR KABUNGWÃ‰.]

     "From Mpungu we travelled through an interesting country (a
     distance of four miles), and suddenly from the crest of a low ridge
     saw the confluence of the Luama with the majestic Lualaba. The
     former appeared to have a breadth of four hundred yards at the
     mouth; the latter was about fourteen hundred yards wide, a broad
     river of a pale gray color winding slowly from south and by east.

     "We hailed its appearance with shouts of joy, and rested on the
     spot to enjoy the view. Across the river, beyond a tawny, grassy
     stretch towards the south-southwest, is Mount Kijima; about one
     thousand feet above the valley, to the south-southeast, across the
     Luama, runs the Luhye-ya ridge; from its base the plain slopes to
     the swift Luama. In the bed of the great river are two or three
     small islands, green with the verdure of trees and sedge. I likened
     it even here to the Mississippi, as it appears before the
     impetuous, full-volumed Missouri pours its rusty-brown water into
     it.

     "A secret rapture filled my soul as I gazed upon the majestic
     stream. The great mystery that for all these centuries nature had
     kept hidden away from the world of science was waiting to be
     solved. For two hundred and twenty miles I had followed one of
     the sources of the Livingstone to the confluence, and now before me
     lay the superb river itself! My task was to follow it to the
     ocean."

[Illustration: NATIVE HOUSES AT MTUYU.]

"It is getting late," said Mr. Stanley, glancing at his watch, "and I
will leave you at this point where you can dream of the great river and
its course to the sea. To-morrow you shall hear about some of the
difficulties we encountered in going forward with the expedition."

As Mr. Stanley retired he was loudly applauded, and it was evident that
the little audience were greatly pleased to hear from his own lips the
account of his journey through the African wilderness.

[Illustration: ANTS'-NEST IN MANYEMA.]




CHAPTER IX.

DIFFICULTIES OF LIVINGSTONE AND CAMERON WITH THEIR FOLLOWERS.--PERSONAL
APPEARANCE OF TIPPU-TIB.--NEGOTIATIONS FOR AN ESCORT.--TIPPU-TIB
ARRANGES TO GO WITH STANLEY.--THE WONDERS OF UREGGA.--GORILLAS AND
BOA-CONSTRICTORS.--THEIR REMARKABLE PERFORMANCES.--A NATION OF
DWARFS.--HOW STANLEY DECIDED WHAT ROUTE TO FOLLOW.--HEADS OR
TAILS?--"SHALL IT BE SOUTH OR NORTH?"--SIGNING THE CONTRACT WITH
TIPPU-TIB.--A REMARKABLE ACCIDENT.--ENTERING NYANGWÃ‰.--LOCATION AND
IMPORTANCE OF THE PLACE.--ITS ARAB RESIDENTS.--MARKET SCENES AT
NYANGWÃ‰.--READY FOR THE START.


The forenoon of the next day was passed as usual; and in the afternoon
the party assembled for the continuation of the story of the journey
across the Dark Continent. It was Fred's turn to read, and the young man
was promptly in his place at the table, and with the open volume before
him.

[Illustration: HILL AND VILLAGE ON THE ROAD TO NYANGWÃ‰.]

"Mr. Stanley left us, last evening," said Fred, "on the banks of the
great river which he called the Livingstone, but which is more familiar
to us as the Congo. Early the next day after his arrival he resumed his
march, pressing forward in the direction of NyangwÃ©, the farthest point
reached by Livingstone and afterwards by Cameron. Both these travellers
greatly desired to explore the mysterious river which flowed past
NyangwÃ©, but were unable to do so. Neither could induce his men to
advance beyond that point; they tried to purchase or hire canoes with
which to descend the river, but none could be obtained.

"The same fate threatened to fall upon Stanley, and compel him to turn
back to Ujiji just as had been the case with Livingstone. But it was his
good-fortune to meet one Hamed bin Mohammed, or Tippu-Tib, an Arab
trader of great influence, who is well known throughout Central Africa.
He has a large force of Arabs under his control, and is a sort of
migratory king among the people where he moves. He can easily assemble a
thousand Arab fighting-men at a few days' notice, and at almost any
moment he can command the services of two or three hundred of them. Here
is a description of him as given by Mr. Stanley:

     "He was a tall, black-bearded man, of negroid complexion, in the
     prime of life, straight, and quick in his movements, a picture of
     energy and strength. He had a fine, intelligent face, with a
     nervous twitching of the eyes, and gleaming white and perfectly
     formed teeth. He was attended by a large retinue of young Arabs,
     who looked up to him as chief, and a score of Wangwana and
     Wanyamwezi followers whom he had led over thousands of miles
     through Africa.

     "With the air of a well-bred Arab, and almost courtier-like in his
     manner, he welcomed me to the village, and his slaves being ready
     at hand with mat and bolster, he reclined _vis-Ã -vis_, while a buzz
     of admiration of his style was perceptible from the on-lookers.
     After regarding him for a few minutes, I came to the conclusion
     that this Arab was a remarkable man--the most remarkable man I had
     met among Arabs, Wa-Swahili, and half-castes in Africa. He was neat
     in his person, his clothes were of a spotless white, his fez-cap
     brand-new, his waist was encircled by a rich dowlÃ©, his dagger was
     splendid with silver filigree, and his _tout ensemble_ was that of
     an Arab gentleman in very comfortable circumstances.

     "The person above described was the Arab who had escorted Cameron
     across the Lualaba as far as Utotera, south latitude 5Â°, and east
     longitude 25Â° 54'. Naturally, therefore, there was no person at
     NyangwÃ© whose evidence was more valuable than Tippu-Tib's as to the
     direction that my predecessor at NyangwÃ© had taken. The information
     he gave me was sufficiently clear--and was, moreover, confirmed by
     other Arabs--that the greatest problem of African geography was
     left untouched at the exact spot where Dr. Livingstone had felt
     himself unable to prosecute his travels, and whence he had retraced
     his steps to Ujiji never to return to NyangwÃ©."

"After a long conference," said Fred, "Mr. Stanley asked Tippu-Tib if he
would accompany the expedition in the exploration of the great river.
The Arab at first declined the proposal, but after several interviews
and a considerable amount of negotiation, it was arranged that, in
consideration of five thousand dollars, Tippu-Tib with one hundred and
fifty of his followers would accompany Mr. Stanley for a distance of
sixty marches from NyangwÃ© in any direction the latter should choose to
take. The contract between them was very carefully drawn, and a
considerable time was spent in arranging it.

[Illustration: WAITING TO BE PHOTOGRAPHED.]

"While these negotiations were in progress Mr. Stanley obtained all the
information possible from Arabs and others relative to the region he
proposed to visit. One Arab who claimed to have followed the course of
the river for a great distance said it flowed 'to the north, to the
north, always to the north, and there is no end to it till it reaches
the salt sea.' He had, he declared, travelled to the north along the
banks of the river till he reached the country of the dwarfs, a journey
of nine months. They were a powerful people, although they were so
small; the men were only a yard high, with big heads and long beards.
His party had a terrible fight with these dwarfs, who fought with
poisoned arrows that cause death almost instantly by the slightest
scratch. Every man that was killed was immediately eaten by the dwarfs,
who have the reputation of being the worst cannibals in all Africa. Out
of two or three hundred Arabs that went on this expedition, only about
thirty remained to return to NyangwÃ©.

"After listening to this wonderful story Mr. Stanley asked the Arab if
he saw any other curious things on his journey.

[Illustration: A YOUNG SOKO (GORILLA).]

"'Oh, yes!' he answered. 'There are monstrous large boa-constrictors in
the forest of Uregga, suspended by their tails to the branches, waiting
for the passer-by or for a stray antelope. The ants in that forest are
not to be despised. You cannot travel without your body being covered
with them, when they sting you like wasps. The leopards are so numerous
that you cannot go very far without seeing one. Almost every native
wears a leopard-skin cap. The sokos (gorillas) are in the woods, and woe
befall the man or woman met alone by them; for they run up to you and
seize your hands, and bite the fingers off one by one, and as fast as
they bite one off, they spit it out. The Wasongora Meno and Waregga are
cannibals, and unless the force is very strong, they never let strangers
pass. It is nothing but constant fighting. Only two years ago a party
armed with three hundred guns started north of Usongora Meno; they only
brought sixty guns back, and no ivory. If one tries to go by the river,
there are falls after falls, which carry the people over and drown them.
A party of thirty men, in three canoes, went down the river half a day's
journey from NyangwÃ©, when the old white man (Livingstone) was living
there. They were all drowned, and that was the reason he did not go on.
Had he done so, he would have been eaten, for what could he have done?
Ah, no. Master, the country is bad, and the Arabs have given it up. They
will not try the journey into that country again, after trying it three
times and losing nearly five hundred men altogether.'

"Before closing his contract with Tippu-Tib Mr. Stanley consulted Frank
Pocock, his only remaining white companion, in order to obtain his views
of the matter. I will read his account of the consultation and what
followed it.

     "At 6 P.M. a couple of saucers, filled with palm-oil and fixed with
     cotton-wick, were lit. It was my after-dinner hour, the time for
     pipes and coffee, which Frank was always invited to share.

     "When he came in the coffee-pot was boiling, and little Mabruki was
     in waiting to pour out. The tobacco-pouch, filled with the
     choicest production of Africa--that of Masansi, near Uvira--was
     ready. Mabruki poured out the coffee, and retired, leaving us
     together.

     "'Now Frank, my son,' I said, 'sit down. I am about to have a long
     and serious chat with you. Life and death--yours as well as mine,
     and those of all the expedition--hang on the decision I make
     to-night.'

     [Illustration: BLACKSMITHS AT WORK.]

     "And then I reminded him of his friends at home, and also of the
     dangers before him; of the sorrow his death would cause, and also
     of the honors that would greet his success; of the facility of
     returning to Zanzibar, and also of the perilous obstacles in the
     way of advance--thus carefully alternating the _pro_ with the
     _con_, so as not to betray my own inclinations. I reminded him of
     the hideous scenes we had already been compelled to witness and to
     act in, pointing out that other wicked tribes, no doubt, lay before
     us; but also recalling to his memory how treachery, cunning, and
     savage courage had been baulked by patience and promptitude; and
     how we still possessed the power to punish those who threatened us
     or murdered our friends. And I ended with words something like
     these:

     "'There is, no doubt, some truth in what the Arabs say about the
     ferocity of these natives before us. Livingstone, after fifteen
     thousand miles of travel, and a lifetime of experience among
     Africans, would not have yielded the brave struggle without strong
     reasons; Cameron, with his forty-five Snider rifles, would never
     have turned away from such a brilliant field if he had not
     sincerely thought that they were insufficient to resist the
     persistent attacks of countless thousands of wild men. But while we
     grant that there may be a modicum of truth in what the Arabs say,
     it is in their ignorant, superstitious nature to exaggerate what
     they have seen. A score of times have we proved them wrong. Yet
     their reports have already made a strong impression on the minds of
     the Wangwana and Wanyamwezi. They are already trembling with fear,
     because they suspect that I am about to attempt the cannibal lands
     beyond NyangwÃ©. On the day that we propose to begin our journey, we
     shall have no expedition.

     [Illustration: NATIVE TRAP FOR GAME.]

     "'On the other hand, I am confident that, if I am able to leave
     NyangwÃ© with the expedition intact, and to place a breadth of wild
     country between our party and the Arab depot, I shall be able to
     make men of them. There are good stuff, heroic qualities, in them;
     but we must get free from the Arabs, or they will be very soon
     demoralized. It is for this purpose I am negotiating with
     Tippu-Tib. If I can arrange with him and leave NyangwÃ© without the
     dreadful loss we experienced at Ujiji, I feel sure that I can
     inspire my men to dare anything with me.

     "'The difficulty of transport, again, is enormous. We cannot obtain
     canoes at NyangwÃ©. Livingstone could not, Cameron failed. No doubt
     I shall fail. I shall not try to obtain any. But we might buy up
     all the axes that we can see between here and NyangwÃ©, and
     travelling overland on this side the Lualaba, we might, before
     Tippu-Tib's contract is at an end, come across a tribe which would
     sell their canoes. We have sufficient stores to last a long time,
     and I shall purchase more at NyangwÃ©. If the natives will not sell,
     we can make our own canoes, if we possess a sufficient number of
     axes to set all hands at work.

     "'Now, what I wish you to tell me, Frank, is your opinion as to
     what we ought to do.'

     "Frank's answer was ready.

     "'I say, "Go on, sir."'

     "'Think well, my dear fellow; don't be hasty; life and death hang
     on our decision. Don't you think we could explore to the east of
     Cameron's road?'

     "'But there is nothing like this great river, sir.'

     "'What do you say to Lake Lincoln, Lake Kamolondo, Lake Bemba, and
     all that part, down to the Zambezi?'

     "'Ah! that is a fine field, sir; and perhaps the natives would not
     be so ferocious. Would they?'

     "'Yet, as you said just now, it would be nothing to the great
     river, which for all these thousands of years has been flowing
     steadily to the north through hundreds, perhaps thousands, of
     miles, of which no one has ever heard a word.'

     [Illustration: CANOES ON THE RIVER.]

     "'Let us follow the river, sir.'

     "'Yet, my friend, think yet again. Look at all these faithful
     fellows whose lives depend on our word; think of our own, for we
     are yet young and strong and active. Why should we throw them away
     for a barren honor, or if we succeed have every word we said
     doubted, and carped at, and our motives misconstrued by malicious
     minds, who distort everything to our injury?'

     "'Ah, true, sir. I was one of those who doubted that you had ever
     found Livingstone. I don't mind telling you now. Until I came to
     Zanzibar, and saw your people, I did not believe it, and there are
     hundreds in Rochester who shared my opinion.'

     "'And do you believe, Frank, that you are in Manyema now?'

     "'I am obliged to, sir.'

     "'Are you not afraid, should you return to England, that when men
     say you have never been to Africa, as no doubt they will, you will
     come to disbelieve it yourself?'

     "'Ah, no, sir,' he replied. 'I can never forget Ituru; the death of
     my brother in that wild land; the deaths of so many Wangwana there;
     the great lake; Uganda; our march to Muta Nzege; Rumanika; my life
     in Ujiji; the Tanganika; and our march here.'

     "'But what do you think, Frank? Had we not better explore northeast
     of here, until we reach Muta Nzege, circumnavigate that lake, and
     strike across to Uganda again, and return to Zanzibar by way of
     Kagehyi?'

     "'That would be a fine job, sir, if we could do it.'

     "'Yet, if you think of it, Frank, this great river which
     Livingstone first saw, and which broke his heart almost to turn
     away from and leave a mystery, is a noble field too. Fancy, by and
     by, after buying or building canoes, our floating down the river
     day by day, either to the Nile or to some vast lake in the far
     north, or to the Congo and the Atlantic Ocean! Think what a benefit
     our journey will be to Africa. Steamers from the mouth of the Congo
     to Lake Bemba, and to all the great rivers which run into it!'

     "'I say, sir, let us toss up; best two out of three to decide it.'

     "'Toss away. Here is a rupee.'

     "'Heads for the north and the Lualaba; tails for the south and
     Katanga.'

     "Frank stood up, his face beaming. He tossed the rupee high up. The
     coin dropped.

     "'What is it?' I asked.

     "'Tails, sir!' said Frank, with a face expressive of strong
     disapproval.

     "'Toss again.'

     "He tossed again, and 'tails' was again announced--and six times
     running 'tails' won.

     [Illustration: "HEADS FOR THE NORTH AND THE LUALABA; TAILS FOR THE
     SOUTH AND KATANGA."]

     "We then tried straws--the short straws for the south, the long
     straws for the River Lualaba--and again we were disappointed, for
     Frank persisted in drawing out the short straws, and in leaving the
     long straws in my hands.

     "'It is of no use, Frank. Well face our destiny, despite the rupee
     and straws. With your help, my dear fellow, I will follow the
     river.'

     "'Mr. Stanley, have no fear of me. I shall stand by you. The last
     words of my dear old father were, "Stick by your master." And there
     is my hand, sir; you shall never have cause to doubt me.'

     "'Good; I shall go on, then. I will finish this contract with
     Tippu-Tib, for the Wangwana, on seeing him accompany us, will
     perhaps be willing to follow me. We may also recruit others at
     NyangwÃ©. And then, if the natives will allow peaceful passage
     through their countries, so much the better. If not, our duty says,
     "Go on."'

     [Illustration: A FOLLOWER OF TIPPU-TIB.]

     "The next night Tippu-Tib and his friends visited me again. The
     contract was written, and signed by the respective parties and
     their witnesses. The Wangwana chiefs were then called, and it was
     announced to them that Tippu-Tib, with one hundred and forty guns
     and seventy Wanyamwezi spearmen, would escort us a distance of
     sixty camps, when, if we found the countries hostile to us, and no
     hopes of meeting other traders, we should return with him to
     NyangwÃ©. If we met Portuguese or Turkish traders, a portion of us
     would continue the journey with them, and the remainder would
     return with Tippu-Tib to NyangwÃ©. This announcement was received
     with satisfaction, and the chiefs said that, owing to Tippu-Tib's
     presence, no Arab at NyangwÃ© would dare to harbor a runaway from
     the expedition.

     "Cowries and beads were then counted out and given that evening to
     Tippu-Tib, as ration money for ten days from the day of his
     departure from Mwana Mamba.

     "The next morning, being the 24th of October, the expedition left
     Mwana Mamba in high spirits. The good effect of the contract with
     Tippu-Tib had already brought us recruits, for on the road I
     observed several strange faces of men who, on our arrival at the
     first camp, Marimbu, eleven miles northwest from Mwana Mamba,
     appeared before my tent, and craved to be permitted to follow us.
     They received an advance in cloth, and their names were entered on
     the muster-list of the expedition at the same rate of pay as the
     other Wanyamwezi and Wangwana.

     "Through a fine rolling country, but depopulated, with every mile
     marked by ruined villages, we marched in a northwesterly direction,
     and on the 25th of October arrived at Kankumba, crossing the Mshama
     stream by the way.

     "About one mile from our camp was the marshy valley of the Kunda
     River, another tributary of the Lualaba, which rises in Uzimba; to
     the east-northeast of us, about eight miles off, rose some hilly
     cones, spurs of the Manyema hills; on the west stretched a rolling
     grassy land extending to the Lualaba.

     "The grass (genus _Panicum_) of Manyema is like other things in
     this prolific land, of gigantic proportions, and denser than the
     richest field of corn. The stalks are an inch in diameter, and
     about eight feet high. In fact, what I have called 'grassy land' is
     more like a waving country planted with young bamboo.

     "Young Kalulu, who, since his recapture at the Uguha port on Lake
     Tanganika, had been well behaved, and was in high favor again, met
     with a serious and very remarkable accident at Kankumba. A chief,
     called Mabruki the elder, had retained a cartridge in his Snider,
     contrary to orders, and, leaving it carelessly on the stacked
     goods, a hurrying Mgwana kicked it down with his foot, which caused
     it to explode. Kalulu, who was reclining on his mat near a fire,
     was wounded in no fewer than _eight_ places, the bullet passing
     through the outer part of his lower legs, the upper part of his
     thigh, and, glancing over his right ribs, through the muscles of
     his left arm.

     "Though the accident had caused severe wounds, there was no danger,
     and, by applying a little arnica, lint, and bandages, we soon
     restored him to a hopeful view of his case.

     "On the morning of the 27th we descended from our camp at Kankumba
     to the banks of the Kunda, a river about forty yards wide, and ten
     feet deep at the ferry. The canoe-men were Wagenya, or Wenya,
     fishermen under the protection of Sheik Abed bin Salim, alias
     'Tanganika.'

     [Illustration: A CANOE OF THE WENYA, OR WAGENYA, FISHERMEN.]

     "A rapid march of four miles brought us to the outskirts of
     NyangwÃ©, where we were met by Abed bin Salim, an old man of
     sixty-five years of age, Mohammed bin Sayid, a young Arab with a
     remarkably long nose and small eyes, Sheik Abed's fundis or
     elephant-hunters, and several Wangwana, all dressed in spotless
     white shirts, crimson fezzes, and sandals.

     "Sheik Abed was pleased to monopolize me, by offering me a house in
     his neighborhood.

     [Illustration: POT-POURRI.

     1. Fish-spear. 2,3. Spears. 4,5,6. Arrow-heads. 7,8,9. Modes of
     stringing bows. 10,11,12. Knives. 13,14. Walking-sticks. 15. Charm.
     16,17,18. Drums. 19. Iron gong. 20,21. Iron bells. 22. Musical
     instrument. 23. Marimba. 24. Sticks for playing marimba. 25.
     Rattle.]

     "The manner that we entered NyangwÃ© appeared, from subsequent
     conversation, to have struck Sheik Abed, who, from his long
     residence there, had witnessed the arrival and departure of very
     many caravans. There was none of the usual firing of guns and wild
     shouting and frenzied action; and the order and steadiness of
     veterans, the close files of a column which tolerably well
     understood by this time the difference between discipline and
     lawlessness with its stragglers and slovenly laggards, made a
     marked impression upon the old Arab.

     "Another thing that surprised him was the rapidity of the journey
     from the Tanganika--three hundred and thirty-eight miles in
     forty-three days, inclusive of all halts. He said that the usual
     period occupied by Arabs was between three and four months. Yet the
     members of the expedition were in admirable condition. They had
     never enjoyed better health, and we had not one sick person; the
     only one incapacitated for work was Kalulu, and he had been
     accidentally wounded only the very night before. Between the
     Tanganika and the Arab depot of NyangwÃ© neither Frank nor I had
     suffered the slightest indisposition.

     [Illustration: VIEW IN NYANGWÃ‰.]

     "NyangwÃ© is the extreme westernmost locality inhabited by the Arab
     traders from Zanzibar. It stands in east longitude 26Â° 16', south
     latitude 4Â° 15', on the right or eastern side of the Lualaba, on
     the verge of a high and reddish bank rising some forty feet above
     the river, with clear open country north along the river for a
     distance of three miles, east some ten miles, south over seventy
     miles, or as far as the confluence of the Luama with the Lualaba.
     The town called NyangwÃ© is divided into two sections. The northern
     section has for its centre the quarters of Muini Dugumbi, the first
     Arab arrival here (in 1868); and around his house are the
     commodious quarters of his friends, their families and slaves--in
     all, perhaps, three hundred houses. The southern section is
     separated from its neighbor by a broad hollow, cultivated and sown
     with rice for the Arabs. When the Lualaba rises to its full
     amplitude, this hollow is flooded. The chief house of the southern
     half of NyangwÃ© is the large and well-built clay _banda_ of Sheik
     Abed bin Salim. In close neighborhood to this are the houses and
     huts of those Arab Wangwana who prefer the company of Abed bin
     Salim to Muini Dugumbi.

     "Between the two foreign chiefs of NyangwÃ© there is great jealousy.
     Each endeavors to be recognized by the natives as being the most
     powerful. Dugumbi is an east-coast trader of Sa'adani, a
     half-caste, a vulgar, coarse-minded old man of probably seventy
     years of age, with a negroid nose and a negroid mind. Sheik Abed is
     a tall, thin old man, white-bearded, patriarchal in aspect,
     narrow-minded, rather peevish and quick to take offence, a thorough
     believer in witchcraft, and a fervid Muslim.

     "Close to Abed's elbows of late years has been the long-nosed young
     Arab, Mohammed bin Sayid, superstitious beyond measure, of enormous
     cunning and subtlety, a pertinacious beggar, of keen trading
     instincts, but in all matters outside trade as simple as a child.
     He offered, for a consideration and on condition that I would read
     the Arabic Koran, to take me up and convey me to any part of Africa
     within a day. By such unblushing falsehoods he has acquired
     considerable influence over the mind of Sheik Abed. The latter told
     me that he was half afraid of him, and that he believed Mohammed
     was an extraordinary man. I asked the silly old sheik if he had
     lent him any ivory. No; but he was constantly being asked for the
     loan of ten frasilah (three hundred and fifty pounds) of ivory, for
     which he was promised fifteen frasilah, or five hundred and
     twenty-five pounds, within six months.

     "Mohammed, during the very first day of my arrival, sent one of his
     favorite slaves to ask first for a little writing-paper, then for
     needles and thread, and, a couple of hours afterwards, for white
     pepper and a bar of soap; in the evening, for a pound or two of
     sugar and a little tea, and, if I could spare it, he would be much
     obliged for some coffee. The next day petitions, each very prettily
     worded--for Mohammed is an accomplished reader of the Koran--came,
     first for medicine, then for a couple of yards of red cloth, then
     for a few yards of fine white sheeting, etc. I became quite
     interested in him--for was he not a lovable, genial character, as
     he sat there chewing betel-nut and tobacco to excess, twinkling his
     little eyes with such malicious humor in them that, while talking
     with him, I could not withdraw mine from watching their quick
     flashes of cunning, and surveying the long, thin nose, with its
     impenetrable mystery and classic lines? I fear Mohammed did not
     love me, but my admiration was excessive for Mohammed.

     [Illustration: A BOWMAN.]

     "'La il Allah--il Allah!' he was heard to say to Sheik Abed, 'that
     old white man Daoud (Livingstone) never gave much to any man; this
     white man gives _nothing_.' Certainly not, Mohammed. My admiration
     is great for thee, my friend; but thou liest so that I am
     disgusted with thee, and thou hast such a sweet, plausible,
     villainous look in thy face, I could punch thee heartily.

     "The next morning Muini (Lord) Dugumbi and following came--a gang
     of veritable freebooters, chiefest of whom was the famous
     Mtagamoyo--the butcher of women and fusillader of children.
     Tippu-Tib, when I asked him, a few weeks after, what he thought of
     Mtagamoyo, turned up his nose and said, 'He is brave, no doubt, but
     he is a man whose heart is as big as the end of my little finger.
     He has no feeling; he kills a native as though he were a
     serpent--it matters not of what sex.'

     "This man is about forty-four years of age, of middle stature and
     swarthy complexion, with a broad face, black beard just graying,
     and thin-lipped. He spoke but little, and that little courteously.
     He did not appear very formidable, but he might be deadly,
     nevertheless. The Arabs of NyangwÃ© regard him as their best
     fighter.

     "Dugumbi the patriarch, or, as he is called by the natives,
     Molemba-Lemba, had the rollicking look of a prosperous and
     coarse-minded old man, who was perfectly satisfied with the
     material aspect of his condition. He deals in humor of the coarsest
     kind--a vain, frivolous old fellow, ignorant of everything but the
     art of collecting ivory, who has contrived to attach to himself a
     host of nameless half-castes of inordinate pride, savage spirit,
     and immeasurable greed.

     [Illustration: CAMP SCENE.]

     "The Arabs of NyangwÃ©, when they first heard of the arrival of
     Tippu-Tib at Imbarri from the south, were anxious to count him as
     their fellow-settler; but Tippu-Tib had no ambition to become the
     chief citizen of a place which could boast of no better settlers
     than vain old Dugumbi, the butcher Mtagamoyo, and silly Sheik Abed;
     he therefore proceeded to Mwana Mamba's, where he found better
     society with Mohammed bin Sayid, Sayid bin Sultan, MsÃ© Ani, and
     Sayid bin Mohammed el Mezrui. Sayid bin Sultan, in features, is a
     rough copy of Abdul Aziz, late Sultan of Turkey.

     [Illustration: AN ESCORT OF GUNNERS AND SPEARMEN.]

     "One of the principal institutions at NyangwÃ© is the Kituka, or the
     market, with the first of which I made acquaintance in 1871, in
     Ujiji and Urundi. One day it is held in the open plaza in front of
     Sheik Abed's house; on the next day in Dugumbi's section, half a
     mile from the other; and on the third at the confluence of the
     Kunda and the Lualaba; and so on in turn.

     "In this market everything becomes vendible and purchasable, from
     an ordinary earthenware pot to a slave. From one thousand to three
     thousand natives gather here from across the Lualaba and from the
     Kunda banks, from the islands up the river, and from the villages
     of the Mitamba, or forest. Nearly all are clad in the fabrics of
     Manyema, fine grass-cloths, which are beautifully colored and very
     durable. The articles sold here for cowries, beads, copper and iron
     wire, and lambas, or squares of palm-cloth,[9] represent the
     productions of Manyema. I went round the market and made out the
     following list:

     [9] Made from the fibre of the _Raphia vinifera_ palm.

  Sweet potatoes.        Eggs.                       Basket-work.
  Yams.                  Fowls.                      Cassava bread.
  Maize.                 Black pigs.                 Cassava flour.
  Sesamum.               Goats.                      Copper bracelets.
  Millet.                Sheep.                      Iron wire.
  Beans.                 Parrots.                    Iron knobs.
  Cucumbers.             Palm-wine (Malofu).         Hoes.
  Melons                 PombÃ© (beer).               Spears.
  Cassava.               Mussels and oysters from    Bows and arrows.
  Ground-nuts.                the river.             Hatchets.
  Bananas.               Fresh fish.                 Rattan-cane staves.
  Sugar-cane.            Dried fish.                 Stools.
  Pepper (in berries).   Whitebait.                  Crockery.
  Vegetables for broths. Snails (dried).             Powdered camwood.
  Wild fruit.            Salt.                       Grass cloths.
  Palm-butter.           White ants.                 Grass mats.
  Oil-palm nuts.         Grasshoppers.               Fuel.
  Pineapples.            Tobacco (dried leaf).       Ivory.
  Honey.                 Pipes.                      Slaves.
                         Fishing-nets.

     "From this it will be perceived that the wants of NyangwÃ© are very
     tolerably supplied. And how like any other market place it was!
     with its noise and murmur of human voices. The same rivalry in
     extolling their wares, the eager, quick action, the emphatic
     gesture, the inquisitive look, the facial expressions of scorn and
     triumph, anxiety, joy, plausibility, were all there. I discovered,
     too, the surprising fact that the aborigines of Manyema possess
     just the same inordinate ideas in respect to their wares as London,
     Paris, and New York shopkeepers. Perhaps the Manyema people are not
     so voluble, but they compensate for lack of language by gesture and
     action, which are unspeakably eloquent.

     [Illustration: SLAVE OFFERED IN THE MARKET.]

     "During this month of the year the Lualaba reached its lowest
     level. Our boat, the _Lady Alice_, after almost being rebuilt, was
     launched in the river, and with sounding-line and sextant on board,
     my crew and I, eager to test the boat on the gray-brown waters of
     the great river, pushed off at 11 A.M., and rowed for an island
     opposite, eight hundred yards distant, taking soundings as we went.
     The soundings showed a mean depth of eighteen feet nine inches.

     [Illustration: NYANGWÃ‰ HEADS.]

     "The easternmost island in mid-river is about one hundred yards
     across at its widest part, and between it and another island is a
     distance of from two hundred and fifty to three hundred yards. From
     the second island to the low shore opposite NyangwÃ© is about two
     hundred and fifty yards, and these channels have a slightly swifter
     flow than the main river. The mean depth of the central channel was
     twelve and a half feet, the westernmost eleven feet, and the entire
     width of clear water flow was about thirteen hundred yards. During
     the months of April, May, and June, and the early part of July, the
     Lualaba is full, and overspreads the low lands westward for nearly
     a mile and a half. The Lualaba then may be said to be from four
     thousand to five thousand yards wide opposite NyangwÃ©.

     "The Arabs, wherever they settle throughout Africa, endeavor to
     introduce the seeds of the vegetables and fruit-trees which grow in
     their beloved island of Zanzibar. At UnyanyembÃ©, therefore, they
     have planted papaws, sweet limes, mangoes, lemons, custard-apples,
     pomegranates, and have sown wheat and rice in abundance. At Ujiji,
     also, they have papaws, sweet limes, pomegranates, lemons, wheat,
     rice, and onions. At NyangwÃ© their fruit consists of pineapples,
     papaws, and pomegranates. They have succeeded admirably in their
     rice, both at NyangwÃ©, Kasongo's, and Mwana Mamba's.

     [Illustration: NYANGWÃ‰ POTTERY.]

     "The Wagenya, as the Arabs call them, or Wenya--pronounced
     Wainya--as they style themselves, are a remarkable tribe of
     fishers, who inhabit both banks of the Lualaba, from the confluence
     of the Kamalondo, on the left bank, down to the sixth cataract of
     the Stanley Falls, and on the right bank, from the confluence of
     the Luama down to UbwirÃ©, or Usongora Meno.

     "The Wenya were the aborigines of NyangwÃ©, when the advanced party
     of Muini Dugumbi appeared on the scene--precursors of ruin, terror,
     and depopulation, to the inhabitants of seven hundred square miles
     of Manyema. Considering that the fertile open tract of country
     between the Luama and NyangwÃ© was exceedingly populous, as the
     ruins of scores of villages testify, sixty inhabitants to the
     square mile would not be too great a proportion. The river border,
     then, of Manyema, from the Luama to NyangwÃ©, may be said to have
     had a population of forty-two thousand souls, of which there remain
     probably only twenty thousand. The others have been deported, or
     massacred, or have fled to the islands or emigrated down the river.

     "Tippu-Tib arrived at NyangwÃ© on the 2d of November, with a much
     larger force than I anticipated, for he had nearly seven hundred
     people with him. However, he explained that he was about to send
     some three hundred of them to a country called Tata, which lies to
     the east of Usongora Meno.

     [Illustration: MUINI DUJAMBI'S FOLLOWERS ATTACKING NYANGWÃ‰.]

     "On the 4th of November the members of the expedition were
     mustered, and we ascertained that they numbered one hundred and
     fifty-four, and that we possessed the following arms: Sniders, 29;
     percussion-lock muskets, 32; Winchesters, 2; double-barrelled guns,
     2; revolvers, 10; axes, 68. Out of this number of sixty-four guns
     only forty were borne by trustworthy men; the others were mere
     pagazis, who would prefer becoming slaves to fighting for their
     freedom and lives. At the same time they were valuable as
     porters, and faithful to their allotted duties and their contract,
     when not enticed away by outside influences or fear. The enormous
     force that Tippu-Tib brought to NyangwÃ© quite encouraged them; and
     when I asked them if they were ready to make good their promise to
     me at Zanzibar and Muta Nzege Lake, they replied unanimously in the
     affirmative.

     "'Then to-night, my friends,' said I, 'you will pack up your goods,
     and to-morrow morning, at the first hour, let me see you in line
     before my house ready to start.'"

     [Illustration: ANTELOPE OF THE NYANGWÃ‰ REGION.]




CHAPTER X.

DEPARTURE FROM NYANGWÃ‰.--THE DARK UNKNOWN.--IN THE PRIMEVAL FOREST.--AN
AFRICAN WILDERNESS.--SAVAGE FURNITURE.--TIPPU-TIB'S DEPENDANTS.--A
TOILSOME MARCH.--THE DENSE JUNGLE.--A DEMORALIZED COLUMN.--AFRICAN
WEAPONS.--A VILLAGE BLACKSMITH.--SKULLS OF SOKOS.--STANLEY'S LAST PAIR
OF SHOES.--SNAKES IN THE WAY.--THE TERRIBLE UNDER-GROWTH.--NATIVES OF
UREGGA AND THEIR CHARACTERISTICS.--SKULLS AS STREET ORNAMENTS.--AMONG
THE CANNIBALS.--ON THE RIVER'S BANK.--A SUDDEN INSPIRATION.--THE TRUE
ROAD TO THE SEA.--TIPPU-TIB'S DISCOURAGEMENTS.--ENCOUNTERING THE
NATIVES.--SUCCESSFUL NEGOTIATIONS.--THE EXPEDITION FERRIED OVER THE
RIVER.--CAMPING IN THE WENYA.


After a brief pause Fred continued to read from the book which lay
before him:

     "When, on the 5th of November, 1876, we had left NyangwÃ© behind us,
     and had attended an elevated grassy ridge, we saw before us a
     black, curving wall of forest, which, beginning from the river
     bank, extended southeast, until hills and distance made it
     indistinct.

     [Illustration: NEAR NYANGWÃ‰.]

     "I turned round to look at NyangwÃ©, which we were leaving. How
     lovable and cheerful it appeared as it crowned the shoulder of one
     of those lengthy grassy undulations overlooking the gray-brown
     Livingstone! How bright and warm appeared the plain border of the
     river as the sun shone over its wind-fanned waves of grass! Even
     the hill-cones of Uzura and western Manyema ranked in line between
     the forest and the grassy plain, which were now purpling and
     becoming like cloud-forms, seemed to me to have a more friendly and
     brighter appearance than the cold blackness of the dense forest
     which rose before us to the north!

     "What a forbidding aspect had the Dark Unknown which confronted us!
     I could not comprehend in the least what lay before us. Even the
     few names which I had heard from the Arabs conveyed no definite
     impression to my understanding. What were Tata, Meginna, Uregga,
     Usongora Meno, and such uncouth names to me? They conveyed no idea,
     and signified no object; they were barren names of either
     countries, villages, or peoples, involved in darkness, savagery,
     ignorance, and fable.

     "Yet it is our destiny to move on, whatever direction it may be
     that that narrow winding path, running among tall grasses and down
     into gullies and across small streams, takes us, until we penetrate
     that cold, dark, still horizon before us, and emerge whithersoever
     the narrow path will permit us--a distance of two hundred and forty
     hours' travel.

     "The object of the desperate journey is to flash a torch of light
     across the western half of the Dark Continent. For from NyangwÃ©
     east, along the fourth parallel of south latitude, are some eight
     hundred and thirty geographical miles, discovered, explored, and
     surveyed; but westward to the Atlantic Ocean, along the same
     latitude, are nine hundred and fifty-six miles--over nine hundred
     geographical miles of which are absolutely unknown. Instead,
     however, of striking direct west, we are about to travel north on
     the eastern side of the river, to prevent it bending easterly to
     Muta Nzege, or Nilewards, unknown to us, and to ascertain, if the
     river really runs westward, what affluents flow to it from the
     east; and to deduce from their size and volume some idea of the
     extent of country which they drain, and the locality of their
     sources.

     [Illustration: OPEN COUNTRY BEFORE REACHING THE FOREST.]

     "A thousand things may transpire to prevent the accomplishment of
     our purpose: hunger, disease, and savage hostility may crush us;
     perhaps, after all, the difficulties may daunt us, but our hopes
     run high, and our purpose is lofty; then, in the name of God let us
     set on, and as he pleases, so let him rule our destinies!

     "After journeying a distance of nine miles and a half northeast,
     over a rolling plain covered with grass, we arrived at the villages
     of Nakasimbi; Tippu-Tib, with seven hundred people--men, women and
     children--occupying two villages, while our expedition occupied
     another, overlooking a depression drained by a sluggish affluent of
     the Kunda River.

     "Tippu-Tib is accompanied by about a dozen Arabs, young or
     middle-aged, who have followed him in the hope of being rewarded by
     him or myself at the end of a prosperous journey.

     "One of them is called Sheik Abdallah, alias Muini Kibwana--a name
     adopted solely for Manyema. He is very ignorant, can neither read
     nor write, but has a vast regard for those who have mastered the
     secrets of literature, like Tippu-Tib. He is armed with a
     flint-lock Brummagem musket, for which he has considerable
     affection, because--according to him--it has saved his life many a
     time. 'It never lies.'

     [Illustration: TIPPU-TIB'S BODY SERVANTS.]

     "The next is Muini Ibrahim, a Mrima (coast) man, of Arab descent,
     though ruder and unpolished. Americans would have very little to do
     with him, because the negroid evidences are so great that he would
     be classed as a full-blooded negro. Yet he speaks Arabic well, and
     is a fervid Muslim, but withal as superstitious as any primitive
     African. He affects to be religious, and consequently is not
     blood-thirsty, having some regard for the lives of human beings,
     and for this receiving due praise from me. He is also armed with a
     flint-lock musket. Sheik Abdallah and he are bosom friends, and
     each possesses from thirty to forty slaves, likewise armed with
     flint-locks.

     "Tippu-Tib's Arab dependants, who dip their hands in the same
     porridge and meat-dish with the independent Sheik Abdallah and
     Muini Ibrahim, consist of Muini Jumah (Master Friday), a nervous,
     tall young man; ChÃ©chÃ© (Weasel), a short, light-complexioned young
     man of twenty-five years of age; Bwana Abed bin Jumah, the author
     of the dwarf story, who has consented to act as our guide; Muini
     Hamadi, a half-caste man of sturdy form and resolute appearance;
     and six or seven others of no special individuality or importance,
     except as so many dependants of Tippu-Tib.

     "The seven hundred people who follow our expedition at present
     consist of two parties: one party composed of three hundred men,
     women, and children, and commanded by Bwana Shokka (master of the
     axe), the confidential man of Tippu-Tib's staff, of great strength,
     tall and gaunt of person, and a renowned traveller; a man of great
     tact, and worth a fortune to his master, as he is exceedingly cool,
     speaks slowly, and by some rare gift conciliates the savages (when
     not actually attacked on the road) and makes them friends. In a few
     days he is to part from us, striking northeasterly for some dozen
     marches, the utmost reach of Arab intercourse.

     [Illustration: JUMAH.]

     "The four hundred who are to accompany us for a distance of sixty
     camps consist of about two hundred and fifty men--Arabs,
     half-castes, Wangwana, one hundred Wanyamwezi, Ruga-Ruga--mostly
     armed with spears and bows and arrows; others possess flint-locks.
     One hundred men consist of Barua, Manyema, Bakusu, Ba-Samha, and
     Utotera slaves; most of these slaves are armed with flint-locks,
     the others with formidable spears and shields. There are also about
     fifty youths, ranging from ten to eighteen years of age, being
     trained by Tippu-Tib as gun-bearers, house-servants, scouts, cooks,
     carpenters, house-builders, blacksmiths, and leaders of trading
     parties. Meanwhile such young fellows are useful to him; they are
     more trustworthy than adults, because they look up to him as their
     father; and know that if they left him they would inevitably be
     captured by a less humane man. The remainder of this motley force
     consists of women, the wives of Tippu-Tib and his followers.

     "Two hundred and ten out of the four hundred I have pledged to
     support until they shall return to NyangwÃ©, at the same rate of
     ration currency that may be distributed to the members of our
     expedition.

     "On the 6th of November we drew nearer to the dreaded black and
     chill forest called Mitamba, and at last, bidding farewell to
     sunshine and brightness, entered it.

     "We had made one mistake--we had not been up early enough.
     Tippu-Tib's heterogeneous column of all ages was ahead of us, and
     its want of order and compactness became a source of trouble to us
     in the rear.

     "We, accustomed to rapid marching, had to stand in our places
     minutes at a time waiting patiently for an advance of a few yards,
     after which would come another halt, and another short advance, to
     be again halted. And all this time the trees kept shedding their
     dew upon us, like rain, in great round drops. Every leaf seemed
     weeping. Down the boles and branches, creepers and vegetable cords,
     the moisture trickled and fell on us. Overhead the wide-spreading
     branches, in many interlaced strata, each branch heavy with broad,
     thick leaves, absolutely shut out the daylight. We knew not whether
     it was a sunshiny day or a dull, foggy, gloomy day; for we marched
     in a feeble, solemn twilight, such as you may experience in
     temperate climes an hour after sunset. The path soon became a
     stiff, clayey paste, and at every step we splashed water over the
     legs of those in front and on either side of us.

     "To our right and left, to the height of about twenty feet, towered
     the undergrowth, the lower world of vegetation. The soil on which
     this thrives is a dark-brown vegetable humus, the _dÃ©bris_ of ages
     of rotting leaves and fallen branches, a very forcing-bed of
     vegetable life, which, constantly fed with moisture, illustrates in
     an astonishing degree the prolific power of the warm, moist shades
     of the tropics.

     "The stiff clay lying under this mould, being impervious, retains
     the moisture which constantly supplies the millions of tiny roots
     of herb, plant, and bush. The innumerable varieties of plants which
     spring up with such marvellous rapidity, if exposed to the gale,
     would soon be laid prostrate. But what rude blast can visit these
     imprisoned shades? The tempest might roar without the leafy world,
     but in its deep bosom there is absolute stillness. One has but to
     tug at a sapling to know that the loose mould has no retentive
     power, and that the sapling's roots have not penetrated the clays.
     Even the giants of the forest have not penetrated very deeply, as
     one may see by the half-exposed roots; they appear to retain their
     upright positions more by breadth of base than by their grasp of
     earth.

     "Every few minutes we found ourselves descending into ditches, with
     streams trending towards the Kunda River, discharged out of leafy
     depths of date-palms, Amoma, CarpodinÃ¦, and Phrynia. Climbing out
     from these streams, up their steep banks, our faces were brushed by
     the broad leaves of the Amomum, or the wild banana, ficus of
     various kinds, and climbing, crawling, obstructing lengths of wild
     vines.

     [Illustration: THE EDGE OF THE FOREST.]

     "Naturally our temper was not improved by this new travelling. The
     dew dropped and pattered on us incessantly until about 10 A.M. Our
     clothes were heavily saturated with it. My white sun-helmet and
     puggaree appeared to be weighted with lead. Being too heavy, and
     having no use for it in the cool, dank shades, I handed it to my
     gun-bearer, for my clothes, gaiters, and boots, which creaked
     loudly with the water that had penetrated them, were sufficient
     weight for me to move with. Added to this vexation was the
     perspiration which exuded from every pore, for the atmosphere was
     stifling. The steam from the hot earth could be seen ascending
     upward and settling like a gray cloud above our heads. In the early
     morning it had been so dense that we could scarcely distinguish the
     various trees by their leafage.

     "At 3 P.M. we had reached Mpotira, in the district of Uzimba,
     Manyema, twenty-one miles and a half from the Arab depot on the
     Lualaba.

     "The poor boatmen did not arrive until evening, for the boat
     sections--dreadful burdens--had to be driven like blunted ploughs
     through the depths of foliage. The men complained bitterly of
     fatigue, and for their sake we rested at Mpotira.

     [Illustration: WATER-BOTTLES.]

     "The nature of the next two days' experiences through the forest
     may be gathered by reading the following portions of entries in my
     journal:

     "'_November_ 8.--N. one half W., nine miles to district of Karindi,
     or Kionga, Uregga.

     "'We have had a fearful time of it to-day in these woods, and Bwana
     Shokka, who has visited this region before, declares with superior
     pride that what we have experienced as yet is only a poor beginning
     to the weeks upon weeks which we shall have to endure. Such
     crawling, scrambling, tearing through the damp, dank jungles, and
     such height and depth of woods!... Once we obtained a sidelong
     view, from a tree on the crown of a hill, over the wild woods on
     our left, which swept in irregular waves of branch and leaf down to
     the valley of the Lualaba. Across the Lualaba, on the western bank,
     we looked with wistful eyes on what appeared to be green, grassy
     plains. Ah! what a contrast to that which we had to endure! It was
     a wild and weird scene, this outlook we obtained of the top of the
     leafy world!... It was so dark sometimes in the woods that I could
     not see the words, recording notes of the track, which I pencilled
     in my note-book. At 3.30 P.M. we arrived in camp, quite worn out
     with the struggle through the intermeshed bush, and almost
     suffocated with the heavy atmosphere. Oh, for a breath of mountain
     air!

     "'_November_ 9, 1876.--N. one half W., ten and a half miles' march
     to Kiussi, Uregga.

     [Illustration: STOOL OF UREGGA.]

     "'Another difficult day's work in the forest and jungle. Our
     expedition is no longer the compact column which was my pride. It
     is utterly demoralized. Every man scrambles as he best may through
     the woods; the path, being over a clayey soil, is so slippery that
     every muscle is employed to assist our progress. The toes grasp the
     path, the head bears the load, the hand clears the obstructing
     bush, the elbow puts aside the sapling. Yesterday the boatmen
     complained so much that I organized all the chiefs into a pioneer
     party, with axes, to clear the path. Of course we could not make a
     wide road. There were many prostrate giants fallen across the
     path, each with a mountain of twigs and branches, compelling us to
     cut roads through the bush a long distance to get round them. My
     boat-bearers are utterly wearied out.'

     [Illustration: UREGGA HOUSE.]

     [Illustration: SPOONS OF UREGGA.]

     "On the 10th we halted for a well-deserved rest. We were now in
     Uregga--the forest country. Fenced round by their seldom-penetrated
     woods, the Waregga have hitherto led lives as secluded as the
     troops of chimpanzees in their forest. Their villages consist of
     long rows of houses, all connected together in one block from fifty
     yards to three hundred yards in length. The doorways are square
     apertures in the walls, only two feet square, and cut at about
     eighteen inches above the ground. Within the long block is divided
     into several apartments for the respective families. Like the
     Manyema houses, the roofs glisten as though smeared with coal-tar.
     There are shelves for fuel, and netting for swinging their
     crockery; into the roof are thrust the various small knick-knacks
     which such families need--the pipe and bunch of tobacco-leaves, the
     stick of dried snails, various mysterious compounds wrapped in
     leaves of plants, pounded herbs, and what not. Besides these we
     noted, as household treasures, the skins of goats, mongoose or
     civet, weasel, wild cat, monkey, and leopard, shells of
     land-snails, very large and prettily marked, and necklaces of the
     _Achatina monetaria_. There is also quite a store of powdered
     camwood, besides curiously carved bits of wood, supposed to be
     talismans against harm, and handsome spoons, while over the door
     are also horns of goats and small forest deer, and, occupying
     conspicuous places, the gaudy war head-dress of feathers of the
     gray-bodied and crimson-tailed parrots, the drum, and some heavy,
     broad-bladed spears with ironwood staffs.

     [Illustration: UREGGA SPEAR.]

     [Illustration: CANE SETTEE.]

     "In the 'arts and sciences' of savage life, these exceedingly
     primitive Africans, buried though they have been from all
     intercourse with others, are superior in some points to many tribes
     more favorably situated. For instance, until the day I arrived at
     Kiussi village, I had not observed a settee. Yet in the depths of
     this forest of Uregga every family possessed a neatly made
     water-cane settee, which would seat comfortably three persons.

     [Illustration: BENCH.]

     "Another very useful article of furniture was the bench four or
     five feet long, cut out of a single log of the white soft wood of
     one of the RubiaceÃ¦, and significant as showing a more sociable
     spirit than that which seems to govern Eastern Africans, among whom
     the rule is, 'Every man to his own stool.'

     [Illustration: BACK-REST.]

     "Another noteworthy piece of furniture is the fork of a tree, cut
     off where the branches begin to ramify. This, when trimmed and
     peeled, is placed in an inverted position. The branches, sometimes
     three, or even four, serve as legs of a singular back-rest.

     [Illustration: AN AFRICAN FEZ OF LEOPARD-SKIN.]

     "All the adult males wear skull-caps of goat or monkey-skin, except
     the chief and elders, whose heads were covered with the
     aristocratic leopard-skin, with the tail of the leopard hanging
     down the back like a tassel.

     "The women were weighted with massive and bright iron rings. One of
     them, who was probably a lady of importance, carried at least
     twelve pounds of iron and five pounds of copper rings on her arms
     and legs, besides a dozen necklaces of the indigenous _Achatina
     monetaria_.

     "From Kiussi, through the same dense jungle and forest, with its
     oppressive atmosphere and its soul-wearying impediments, we made a
     journey of fourteen miles to Mirimo. It is a populous settlement,
     and its people are good-natured.

     "For several days we struggled on through the terrible forest. The
     Wangwana began to murmur loudly, while the boatmen, though assisted
     by a dozen supernumeraries and preceded by a gang of pioneers, were
     becoming perfectly savage; but the poor fellows had certainly cause
     for discontent. I pitied them from my soul, yet I dared not show
     too great a solicitude, lest they should have presumed upon it, and
     requested me either to return to NyangwÃ© or to burn my boat.

     "Even Tippu-Tib, whom I anxiously watched, as on him I staked all
     my hopes and prospects, murmured. The evil atmosphere created
     sickness in the Arab escort, but all my people maintained their
     health, if not their temper. The constant slush and reek which the
     heavy dews caused in the forest had worn my shoes out, and half of
     the march on the fifteenth of November I travelled with naked feet.
     I had then to draw out of my store my last pair of shoes. Frank was
     already using his last pair. Yet we were still in the very centre
     of the continent. What should we do when all were gone? was a
     question which we asked of each other often.

     "The faces of the people, Arabs, Wangwana, Wanyamwezi, and the
     escort, were quite a study at the camp. All their courage was
     oozing out, as day by day we plodded through the doleful, dreary
     forest. We saw a python ten feet long, a green viper, and a
     monstrous puff-adder on this march, besides scores of monkeys, of
     the white-necked or glossy-black species, as also the small gray,
     and the large howling baboons. We heard also the 'soko,' or
     chimpanzee, and saw one 'nest' belonging to it in the fork of a
     tall bombax. A lemur was also observed; its loud, harsh cries made
     each night hideous.

     [Illustration: PRICKLES OF THE ACACIA PLANT.]

     "The path presented myriapedes, black and brown, six inches in
     length; while beetles were innumerable, and armies of the
     deep-brown 'hot-water' ants compelled us to be cautious how we
     stepped.

     [Illustration: AN AFRICAN ANT.]

     "The difficulties of such travel as we had now commenced may be
     imagined when a short march of six miles and a half occupied the
     twenty-four men who were carrying the boat-sections an entire day,
     and so fatigued them that we had to halt a day to recruit their
     exhausted strength.

     "The terrible undergrowth that here engrossed all the space under
     the shade of the pillared bombax and mastlike mvulÃ© was a miracle
     of vegetation. It consisted of ferns, spear-grass, water-cane, and
     orchidaceous plants, mixed with wild vines, cable thicknesses of
     the _Ficus elastica_, and a sprinkling of mimosas, acacias,
     tamarinds; llianes, palms of various species, wild date, _Raphia
     vinifera_, the elais, the fan, rattans, and a hundred other
     varieties, all struggling for every inch of space, and swarming
     upward with a luxuriance and density that only this extraordinary
     hothouse atmosphere could nourish. We had certainly seen forests
     before, but this scene was an epoch in our lives ever to be
     remembered for its bitterness; the gloom enhanced the dismal misery
     of our life; the slopping moisture, the unhealthy reeking
     atmosphere, and the monotony of the scenes; nothing but the eternal
     interlaced branches, the tall aspiring stems, rising from a tangle
     through which we had to burrow and crawl like wild animals, on
     hands and feet.

     "One morning, when we were encamped at a village called
     Wane-Kirumbu, Tippu-Tib and the Arabs came to my hut. After a long
     preamble, wherein he described the hardships of the march,
     Tippu-Tib concluded by saying that he had come to announce his wish
     that our contract should be dissolved!

     [Illustration: MARABOUTS, STORKS, AND PELICANS IN THE FOREST
     LAKES.]

     "In a moment it flashed on my mind that a crisis had arrived. Was
     the expedition to end here? I urged with all my powers the
     necessity for keeping engagements so deliberately entered into.

     "For two hours I plied him with arguments, and at last, when I was
     nearly exhausted, Tippu-Tib consented to accompany me twenty
     marches farther, beginning from the camp we were then in. It was a
     fortunate thing indeed for me that he agreed to this, as his return
     so close to NyangwÃ© in the present dispirited condition of my
     people's minds would have undoubtedly insured the destruction of
     all my hopes.

     "The natives of Uregga are not liberally disposed. Wane-Kirumbu's
     chief was the first who consented to exchange gifts with me. He
     presented me with a chicken and some bananas, and I reciprocated
     the gift with five cowries, which he accepted without a murmur. On
     witnessing this pleasing and most uncommon trait of moderation, I
     presented him with ten more, which appeared to him so bounteous
     that he left my presence quite affected, indeed almost overcome by
     his emotions of gratitude.

     "The men of these forest communities of Uregga, upon the decease of
     their wives, put on symbols of mourning, namely, a thick daub of
     charcoal paste over the face, which they retain for five
     'years'--two and a half European years. Widows also mourn for their
     husbands a like period, with the same disfigurement of features,
     but with the addition of bands of sere leaf of the banana round the
     forehead.

     [Illustration: A FORGE AND SMITHY AT WANE-KIRUMBU, UREGGA.]

     At Wane-Kirumbu we found a large native forge and smithy, where
     there were about a dozen smiths busily at work. The iron ore is
     very pure. Here were the broad-bladed spears of southern Uregga,
     and the equally broad knives of all sizes, from the small
     waist-knife, an inch and a half in length, to the heavy Roman
     swordlike cleaver. The bellows for the smelting-furnace are four in
     number, double-handled, and manned by four men, who, by a quick
     up-and-down motion, supply a powerful blast, the noise of which is
     heard nearly half a mile from the scent. The furnace consists of
     tamped clay, raised into a mound about four feet high. A hollow is
     then excavated in it, two feet in diameter and two feet deep. From
     the middle of the slope four apertures are excavated into the base
     of the furnace, into which are fitted funnel-shaped earthenware
     pipes to convey the blasts to the fire. At the base of the mound a
     wide aperture for the hearth is excavated, penetrating below the
     furnace. The hearth receives the dross and slag.

     "Close by stood piled up mat-sacks of charcoal, with a couple of
     boys ready to supply the fuel, and about two yards off was a
     smaller smithy, where the iron was shaped into hammers, axes,
     war-hatchets, spears, knives, swords, wire, iron balls with spikes,
     leglets, armlets, iron beads, etc. The art of the blacksmith is of
     a high standard in these forests, considering the loneliness of the
     inhabitants. The people have much traditional lore, and it appears
     from the immunity which they have enjoyed in these dismal retreats
     that from one generation to another something has been communicated
     and learned, showing that even the jungle man is a progressive and
     improvable animal.

     "On the 17th of November we crossed several lofty, hilly ridges,
     and after a march of eleven miles northwesterly through the dank,
     dripping forests, arrived at Kampunzu, in the district of Uvinza,
     where dwell the true aborigines of the forest country.

     "Kampunzu village is about five hundred yards in length, formed of
     one street thirty feet wide, flanked on each side by a straight,
     symmetrical, and low block of houses, gable-roofed. Several small
     villages in the neighborhood are of the same pattern.

     "The most singular feature of Kampunzu village were two rows of
     skulls ten feet apart, running along the entire length of the
     village, imbedded about two inches deep in the ground, the
     'cerebral hemispheres' uppermost, bleached, and glistening white
     from weather. The skulls were one hundred and eighty-six in number
     in this one village. To me they appeared to be human, though many
     had an extraordinary projection of the posterior lobes, others of
     the parietal bones, and the frontal bones were unusually low and
     retreating; yet the sutures and the general aspect of the greatest
     number of them were so similar to what I believed to be human that
     it was almost with an indifferent air that I asked my chiefs and
     Arabs what these skulls were. They replied,
     'sokos'--chimpanzees(?).

     "'Sokos from the forest?'

     "'Certainly,' they all replied.

     "'Bring the chief of Kampunzu to me immediately,' I said, much
     interested now because of the wonderful reports of them that
     Livingstone had given me, as also the natives of Manyema.

     "The chief of Kampunzu--a tall, strongly-built man of about
     thirty-five years of age--appeared, and I asked,

     "'My friend, what are those things with which you adorn the street
     of your village?'

     "He replied, 'Nyama' (meat).

     "'Nyama! Nyama of what?'

     "'Nyama of the forest.'

     "'Of the forest! What kind of thing is this Nyama of the forest?'

     "'It is about the size of this boy,' pointing to Mabruki, my
     gun-bearer, who was four feet ten inches in height. 'He walks like
     a man, and goes about with a stick, with which he beats the trees
     in the forest, and makes hideous noises. The Nyama eat our bananas,
     and we hunt them, kill them, and eat them.

     "'Are they good eating?' I asked.

     "He laughed, and replied that they were very good.

     "'Would you eat one if you had one now?'

     "'Indeed I would. Shall a man refuse meat?'

     "'Well, look here. I have one hundred cowries here. Take your men
     and catch one, and bring him to me, alive or dead. I only want his
     skin and head. You may have the meat.'

     "Kampunzu's chief, before he set out with his men, brought me a
     portion of the skin of one, which probably covered the back. The
     fur was dark gray, an inch long, with the points inclined to white;
     a line of darker hair marked the spine. This, he assured me, was a
     portion of the skin of a 'soko.' He also showed me a cap made out
     of it, which I purchased.

     [Illustration: A YOUNG "SOKO" SITTING FOR HIS PORTRAIT.]

     "The chief returned about evening unsuccessful from the search. He
     wished us to remain two or three days, that he might set traps for
     the 'sokos,' as they would be sure to visit the bananas at night.
     Not being able to wait so many days, I obtained for a few cowries
     the skull of a male and another of a female.

     "These two skulls were safely brought to England and shown to
     Professor Huxley, who passed judgment upon them as follows:

     [Illustration: HEAD OF THE GORILLA.]

     "'Of the two skulls submitted to me for examination, the one is
     that of a man probably somewhat under thirty years of age, and the
     other that of a woman over fifty. Nothing in these skulls justifies
     the supposition that their original possessors differed in any
     sensible degree from the ordinary African negro.'

     "Professor Huxley thus startles me with the proof that Kampunzu's
     people were cannibals, for at least one half the number of skulls
     seen by me bore the mark of a hatchet, which had been driven into
     the head while the victims were alive.

     "In this village were also observed those carved benches cut out of
     the RubiaceÃ¦ already mentioned, backgammon trays, and stools carved
     in the most admirable manner, all being decorated around the edges
     of the seats with brass tacks and 'soko' teeth.

     [Illustration: BACKGAMMON TRAY.]

     "The women of Uregga wear only aprons, of bark or grass-cloth,
     fastened by cords of palm fibre. The men wear skins of civet, or
     monkey, in front and rear, the tails downward. It may have been
     from a hasty glance of a rapidly disappearing form of one of these
     people in the wild woods that native travellers in the lake regions
     felt persuaded that they had seen 'men with tails.'

     "On the 19th a march of five miles through the forest west from
     Kampunzu brought us to the Lualaba, in south latitude 3Â° 35', just
     forty-one geographical miles north of the Arab depot NyangwÃ©. An
     afternoon observation for longitude showed east longitude 25Â° 49'.
     The name Lualaba terminates here. I mean to speak of it henceforth
     as THE LIVINGSTONE.

     "The Livingstone was twelve hundred yards wide from bank to bank
     opposite the landing-place of Kampunzu. As there were no people
     dwelling within a mile of the right bank, we prepared to encamp. My
     tent was pitched about thirty feet from the river, on a grassy
     spot; Tippu-Tib and his Arabs were in the bushes; while the five
     hundred and fifty people of whom the expedition consisted began to
     prepare a site for their huts, by enlarging the open space around
     the landing place.

     "While my breakfast (for noon) was cooking, and my tent was being
     drawn taut and made trim, a mat was spread on a bit of short grass,
     soft as an English lawn, a few yards from the water. Some sedgy
     reeds obstructed my view, and as I wished while resting to watch
     the river gliding by, I had them all cropped off short.

     "Frank and the Wangwana chiefs were putting the boat-sections
     together in the rear of the camp; I was busy thinking, planning a
     score of things--what time it would be best to cross the river, how
     we should commence our acquaintance with the warlike tribes on the
     left bank, what our future would be, how I should succeed in
     conveying our large force across, and, in the event of a determined
     resistance, what we should do, etc.

     "Gentle as a summer's dream, the brown wave of the great
     Livingstone flowed by, broad and deep. On the opposing bank loomed
     darkly against the sky another forest, similar to the one which had
     harrowed our souls. I obtained from my seat a magnificent view of
     the river, flanked by black forests, gliding along, with a serene
     grandeur and an unspeakable majesty of silence about it that caused
     my heart to yearn towards it.

     "Downward it flows to the unknown! to night-black clouds of mystery
     and fable, mayhap past the lands of the anthropoids, the pigmies,
     and the blanket-eared men of whom the gentle pagan king of KaragwÃ©
     spoke, by leagues upon leagues of unexplored lands, populous with
     scores of tribes, of whom not a whisper has reached the people of
     other continents; perhaps that fabulous being, the dread Macoco, of
     whom Bartolomeo Diaz, Cada Mosto, and Dapper have written, is still
     represented by one who inherits his ancient kingdom and power, and
     surrounded by barbarous pomp. Something strange must surely lie in
     the vast space occupied by total blankness on our maps between
     NyangwÃ© and "Tuckey's Farthest!"

     "'I seek a road to connect these two points. We have labored
     through the terrible forest, and manfully struggled through the
     gloom. My people's hearts have become faint. I seek a road. Why,
     here lies a broad watery avenue cleaving the Unknown to some sea,
     like a path of light! Here are woods all around, sufficient for a
     thousand fleets of canoes. Why not build them?'

     "I sprang up; told the drummer to call to muster. The people
     responded wearily to the call. Frank and the chiefs appeared. The
     Arabs and their escort came also, until a dense mass of expectant
     faces surrounded me. I turned to them and said,

     [Illustration: IN FULL STYLE.]

     "Arabs! sons of Unyamwezi! children of Zanzibar! listen to words.
     We have seen the Mitamba of Uregga. We have tasted its bitterness,
     and have groaned in spirit. We seek a road. We seek something by
     which we may travel. I seek a path that shall take me to the sea. I
     have found it.'

     "Ah! ah--h!' and murmurs and inquiring looks at one another.

     "'Yes! El hamd ul Illah. I have found it. Regard this mighty river.
     From the beginning it has flowed on thus, as you see it flow
     to-day. It has flowed on in silence and darkness. Whither? To the
     salt sea, as all rivers go! By that salt sea, on which the great
     ships come and go, live my friends and your friends. Do they not?

     "Cries of 'Yes! yes!'

     "'Yet, my people, though this river is so great, so wide and deep,
     no man has ever penetrated the distance lying between this spot on
     which we stand and our white friends who live by the salt sea. Why?
     Because it was left for us to do.'

     "'Ah, no! no! no!' and desponding shakes of the head.

     "'Yes,' I continued, raising my voice; 'I tell you, my friends, it
     has been left from the beginning of time until to-day for us to do.
     It is our work, and no other. It is the voice of Fate! The One God
     has written that this year the river shall be known throughout its
     length! We will have no more Mitambas; we will have no more panting
     and groaning by the wayside; we will have no more hideous darkness;
     we will take to the river, and keep to the river. To-day I shall
     launch my boat on that stream, and it shall never leave it until I
     finish my work. I swear it.

     "'Now, you Wangwana! You who have followed me through Turu, and
     sailed around the great lakes with me; you, who have followed me,
     like children following their father, through Unyoro, and down to
     Ujiji, and as far as this wild, wild land, will you leave me here?
     Shall I and my white brother go alone? Will you go back and tell my
     friends that you left me in this wild spot, and cast me adrift to
     die? Or will you, to whom I have been so kind, whom I love as I
     would love my children, will you bind me, and take me back by
     force? Speak, Arabs? Where are my young men, with hearts of lions?
     Speak, Wangwana, and show me those who dare follow me?'

     "Uledi, the coxswain, leaped upward, and then sprang towards me,
     and kneeling grasped my knees, and said, 'Look on me, my master! I
     am one! I will follow you to death!' 'And I,' KachÃ©chÃ© cried; 'and
     I, and I, and I,' shouted the boat's crew.

     "'It is well. I knew I had friends. You, then, who have cast your
     lot with me stand on one side, and let me count you.'

     "There were thirty-eight! Ninety-five stood still, and said
     nothing.

     "'I have enough. Even with you, my friends, I shall reach the sea.
     But there is plenty of time. We have not yet made our canoes. We
     have not yet parted with the Arabs. We have yet a long distance to
     travel with Tippu-Tib. We may meet with good people, from whom we
     may buy canoes. And by the time we part I am sure that the
     ninety-five men now fearing to go with us will not leave their
     brothers, and their master and his white brother, to go down the
     river without them. Meantime I give you many thanks, and shall not
     forget your names.'

     [Illustration: A TRIBUTARY RIVER.]

     "The assembly broke up, and each man proceeded about his special
     duties. Tippu-Tib, Sheik Abdallah, and Muini Ibrahim sat on the
     mat, and commenced to try to persuade me not to be so rash, and to
     abandon all idea of descending the river. In my turn I requested
     them not to speak like children, and, however they might think, not
     to disclose their fears to the Wangwana; but rather to encourage
     them to do their duty, and share the dangers with me, because the
     responsibility was all my own, and the greatest share of danger
     would be mine; and that I would be in front to direct and guide,
     and save, and for my own sake as well as for their sake would be
     prudent.

     "In reply, they spoke of cataracts and cannibals and warlike
     tribes. They depreciated the spirit of the Wangwana, and declaimed
     against men who were once slaves; refused to concede one virtue to
     them, either of fidelity, courage, or gratitude, and predicted that
     the end would be death to all.

     [Illustration: WANGWANA WOMEN.]

     "'Speak no more, Tippu-Tib. You who have travelled all your life
     among slaves have not yet learned that there lies something good in
     the heart of every man that God made. Men were not made all bad, as
     you say. For God is good, and he made all men. I have studied my
     people; I know them and their ways. It will be my task to draw the
     good out of them while they are with me; and the only way to do it
     is to be good to them, for good produces good. As you value my
     friendship, and hope to receive money from me, be silent. Speak not
     a word of fear to my people, and when we part I shall make known my
     name to you. To you, and to all who are my friends, I shall be "the
     white man with the open hand." But if not, then I shall be
     "Kipara-moto."'

     "While I had been speaking, a small canoe with two men was seen
     advancing from the opposite bank. One of the interpreters was
     called, and told to speak to them quietly, and to ask them to bring
     canoes to take us across.

     "We had a long parley, but it resulted in nothing. The natives
     refused to ferry us over the river at any price, and on the way
     back they set up a war-cry which resounded through the forest, and
     was repeated from many points. Meantime my people were putting the
     _Lady Alice_ in readiness, and by the time I had finished my
     breakfast the _Lady Alice_ was in the river, and a loud shout of
     applause greeted her appearance on the water.

     "The boat's crew, with Uledi as coxswain, and Tippu-Tib, Sheik
     Abdallah, Muini Ibrahim, Bwana Abed (the guide), Muni Jumah, and
     two interpreters and myself as passengers, entered the boat. We
     were rowed up the river for half an hour, and then struck across to
     a small island in mid-stream. With the aid of a glass I examined
     the shores, which from our camp appeared to be dense forest. We saw
     that there were about thirty canoes tied to the bank, and among the
     trees I detected several houses. The bank was crowded with human
     beings, who were observing our movements.

     "We re-entered our boat and pulled straight across to the left
     bank, then floated down slowly with the current, meantime
     instructing the interpreters as to what they should say to the
     Wenya.

     "When we came opposite, an interpreter requested them to take a
     look at the white man who had come to visit their country, who
     wished to make friends with them, who would give them abundance of
     shells, and allow none of his men to appropriate a single banana,
     or do violence to a single soul; not a leaf would be taken, nor a
     twig burned, without being paid for.

     "The natives, gazing curiously at me, promised, after a
     consultation, that if we made blood-brotherhood with them there
     should be no trouble, and that for this purpose the white chief,
     accompanied by ten men, should proceed early next morning to the
     island, where he would be met by the chief of the Wenya and his ten
     men; and that, after the ceremony, all the canoes should cross and
     assist to carry our people to their country.

     "After thanking them, we returned to camp, highly elated with our
     success. At 4 A.M., however, the boat secretly conveyed twenty men
     with KachÃ©chÃ©, who had orders to hide in the brushwood, and,
     returning to camp at 7 A.M., conveyed Frank and ten men, who were
     to perform the ceremony of brotherhood, to the island. On its
     return I entered the boat, and was rowed a short way up stream
     along the right bank, so that, in case of treachery, I might be
     able to reach the island within four minutes to lend assistance.

     [Illustration: SOME OF THE PEOPLE ON SHORE.]

     "About 9 A.M. six canoes full of men were seen to paddle to the
     island. We saw them arrive before it, and finally draw near.
     Earnestly and anxiously I gazed through my glass at every movement.
     Other canoes were seen advancing to the island. A few seconds after
     the latest arrivals had appeared on the scene, I saw great
     animation, and almost at once those curious cries came pealing up
     the river. There were animated shouts, and a swaying of bodies,
     and, unable to wait longer, we dashed towards the island, and the
     natives on seeing us approach paddled quickly to their
     landing-place.

     "'Well, Frank, what was the matter?' I asked.

     "'I never saw such wretches in my life, sir. When that last batch
     of canoes came, their behavior, which was decent before, changed.
     They surrounded us. Half of them remained in the canoes; those on
     land began to abuse us violently, handling their spears, and acting
     so furiously that if we had not risen with our guns ready they
     would have speared us as we were sitting down waiting to begin the
     ceremony. But KachÃ©chÃ©, seeing their wild behavior and menacing
     gestures, advanced quietly from the brushwood with his men, on
     seeing which they ran to their canoes, where they held their spears
     ready to launch when you came.'

     "'Well, no harm has been done yet,' I replied; 'so rest where you
     are, while I take KachÃ©chÃ© and his men across to their side, where
     a camp will be formed; because, if we delay to-day crossing, we
     shall have half of the people starving by to-morrow morning.'

     "After embarking KachÃ©chÃ©, we steered for a point in the woods
     above the native village, and, landing thirty men with axes,
     proceeded to form a small camp, which might serve as a nucleus
     until we should be enabled to transport the expedition. We then
     floated down river opposite the village, and, with the aid of an
     interpreter, explained to them that as we had already landed thirty
     men in their country, it would be far better that they should
     assist us in the ferriage, for which they might feel assured that
     they would be well paid. At the same time I tossed a small bag of
     beads to them. In a few minutes they consented, and six canoes,
     with two men in each, accompanied us to camp. The six canoes and
     the boat conveyed eighty people safely to the left bank; and then
     other canoes, animated by the good understanding that seemed to
     prevail between us, advanced to assist, and by night every soul
     associated with our expedition was rejoicing by genial camp-fires
     in the villages of the Wenya."

It was now time to adjourn the meeting of the _Eider_'s Geographical
Society. Fred briefly announced that the reading would be continued in
the evening, and immediately the little party proceeded to a promenade
on deck, where they discussed the narrative to which they had just
listened, and wondered what happened next.




CHAPTER XI.

HOW STANLEY OBTAINED CANOES.--THE PEOPLE OF UKUSU.--THEIR HOSTILITY.--A
FIGHT AND TERMS OF PEACE.--SEPARATION FROM TIPPU-TIB.--DEPARTURE
"TOWARDS THE UNKNOWN."--A SAD FAREWELL.--AMONG THE VINYA-NARA.--THE
NATIVES AT STANLEY FALLS.--A FIERCE BATTLE.--DEFENDING A
STOCKADE.--BOATS CAPSIZED IN A TEMPEST AND MEN DROWNED.--BEGINNING OF
THE NEW YEAR.--A BATTLE ON THE WATER.--MONSTER CANOES.--AMONG THE MWANA
NTABA.--THE NATIVES ARE DEFEATED.--FIRST CATARACT OF STANLEY
FALLS.--CAMPED IN A FORTIFICATION.


"Mr. Stanley's hope of obtaining canoes was soon realized," said Fred,
when the party assembled in the evening, "but he suffered greatly before
he secured them. Small-pox and other diseases carried off many of his
people; the natives at first refused all offers of peace, and would sell
no provisions. At the rapids of Ukassa, near the mouth of the Ruiki
River, a fleet of canoes came to attack him, but the savages retreated
when they found the strangers were ready to fight.

[Illustration: CANOES IN THE MOUTH OF THE RUIKI RIVER.]

"He found some old and abandoned canoes which his men repaired; and with
these canoes and the _Lady Alice_ he transported a part of his force,
while the remainder went by land. The banks of the river were densely
peopled, and the houses in the villages showed a considerable advance
towards civilization. Many of the villages were built in regular
streets, and some of these streets were fully two miles long. From a
native, who was made prisoner, Mr. Stanley learned that he was in the
district called Ukusu, and that the people would not permit strangers to
pass along the river. The river was about seventeen hundred yards wide,
and thickly studded in many places with islands densely covered with
trees and undergrowth.

[Illustration: WAR-HATCHET OF UKUSU.]

"The houses were of various patterns, but all of a single story in
height. Most of them were mere double cages, made very elegantly of the
panicum grass cane, seven feet long by five feet wide and six feet high,
separated, as regards the main building, but connected by the roof, so
that the central apartments were common to both cages, and in these the
families meet and perform their household duties, or receive their
friends for social chat. Near each village was the burial-place or vault
of its preceding kings, roofed over, with the leaves of the _Phrynium
ramosissimum_, which appears to be as useful a plant for many reasons as
the banana to the Waganda.

[Illustration: STOOL OF UKUSU.]

"At one of the villages a large number of natives attacked the
expedition, which had taken position and built a stockade close to the
river's bank. Thousands of poisoned arrows came whizzing into the
stockade, and hundreds of spears were thrown, but the rifles of the
expedition held the savages at bay. When the day ended, the negroes
retired to the opposite side of the river, where they tied their canoes
to the bank. During the night Mr. Stanley and Frank Pocock crossed the
river with the _Lady Alice_ and their large canoe; one by one the canoes
of the natives were silently secured and taken away to the number of
thirty-eight, and when the natives woke in the morning, they were
probably never more astonished in their lives.

[Illustration: STEW-POT OF THE WAHIKA.]

"A peace was negotiated, and terms of blood-brotherhood were made. Mr.
Stanley returned fifteen of the canoes, and retained twenty-three as an
equivalent for the losses he had sustained in the attack. He had a
sufficient number of boats now for his purpose.

[Illustration: ENCOUNTER WITH A GORILLA.]

"Tippu-Tib announced that he would go no farther. Mr. Stanley released
him from his engagement, on condition that he would use his influence
with the members of the expedition to remain with it. A satisfactory
settlement was made with Tippu-Tib and his people; farewell feasts were
given, and everything seemed favorable for the future. Provisions for
twenty days were prepared, the men were assigned to the boats, and, to
make the fleet as much like a civilized one as possible, each boat
received a name. Here is the list:

  1. The exploring boat, Lady Alice.     13. London Town.
  2. Ocean, commanded by Frank.          14. America.
  3. Livingstone.                        15. Hart.
  4. Stanley.                            16. Daphne.
  5. Telegraph.                          17. Lynx.
  6. Herald.                             18. Nymph.
  7. Jason.                              19. Vulture.
  8. Argo.                               20. Shark.
  9. Penguin.                            21. Arab.
  10. Wolverine.                         22. Mirambo.
  11. Fawn.                              23. Mtesa.
  12. Glasgow (flag-ship, commanded by Manwa Sera).

[Illustration: A HOUSE OF TWO ROOMS.]

"And now," said Fred, "we will hear Mr. Stanley's story of how they set
out on their adventurous voyage:

     "The crisis drew nigh when the 28th of December dawned. A gray mist
     hung over the river, so dense that we could not see even the palmy
     banks on which Vinya-Njara was situated. It would have been
     suicidal to begin our journey on such a gloomy morning. The people
     appeared as cheerless and dismal as the foggy day. We cooked our
     breakfasts in order to see if, by the time we had fortified the
     soul by satisfying the cravings of the stomach, the river and its
     shores might not have resumed their usual beautiful outlines, and
     their striking contrasts of light and shadow.

     [Illustration: CANOE SCOOP.]

     "Slowly the breeze wafted the dull and heavy mists away until the
     sun appeared, and bit by bit the luxuriantly wooded banks rose up
     solemn and sad. Finally the gray river was seen, and at 9 A.M. its
     face gleamed with the brightness of a mirror.

     [Illustration: SCOOPS.]

     "'Embark, my friends! Let us at once away! and a happy voyage to
     us.'

     [Illustration: "TOWARD THE UNKNOWN."]

     "The drum and trumpet proclaimed to Tippu-Tib's expectant ears that
     we were ascending the river. In half an hour we were pulling across
     to the left bank, and when we reached it, a mile above Vinya-Njara,
     we rested on our oars. The strong brown current soon bore us down
     within hearing of a deep and melodious diapason of musical voices
     chanting the farewell song. How beautiful it sounded to us as we
     approached them! The dense jungle and forest seemed to be
     penetrated with the vocal notes, and the river to bear them
     tenderly towards us. Louder the sad notes swelled on our ears, full
     of a pathetic and mournful meaning. With bated breath we listened
     to the rich music which spoke to us unmistakably of parting, of
     sundered friendship, a long, perhaps an eternal, farewell. We came
     in view of them, as, ranged along the bank in picturesque costume,
     the sons of Unyamwezi sang their last song. We waved our hands to
     them. Our hearts were so full of grief that we could not speak.
     Steadily the brown flood bore us by, and fainter and fainter came
     the notes down the water, till finally they died away, leaving us
     all alone on the great river.

     [Illustration: COIL OF PLAITED ROPE, CENTRAL AFRICA.]

     "But, looking up, I saw the gleaming portal to the Unknown: wide
     open to us and away down, for miles and miles, the river lay
     stretched with all the fascination of its mystery. I stood up and
     looked at the people. How few they appeared to dare the region of
     fable and darkness! They were nearly all sobbing. They were leaning
     forward, bowed, as it seemed, with grief and heavy hearts.

     "'Sons of Zanzibar,' I shouted, 'the Arabs and the Wanyemwezi are
     looking at you. They are now telling one another what brave fellows
     you are. Lift up your heads and be men. What is there to fear? All
     the world is smiling with joy. Here we are all together like one
     family, with hearts united, all strong with the purpose to reach
     our homes. See this river; it is the road to Zanzibar. When saw you
     a road so wide? When did you journey along a path like this? Strike
     your paddles deep, cry out Bismillah! and let us forward.'

     "Poor fellows! with what wan smiles they responded to my words! How
     feebly they paddled! But the strong flood was itself bearing us
     along, and the Vinya-Njara villages were fast receding into
     distance.

     "Then I urged my boat's crew, knowing that thus we should tempt the
     canoes to quicker pace. Three or four times Uledi, the coxswain,
     gallantly attempted to sing, in order to invite a cheery chorus,
     but his voice soon died into such piteous hoarseness that the very
     ludicrousness of the tones caused his young friends to smile even
     in the midst of their grief.

     "We knew that the Vinya-Njara district was populous from the
     numbers of natives that fought with us by land and water, but we
     had no conception that it was so thickly populated as the long row
     of villages we now saw indicated. I counted fourteen separate
     villages, each with its respective growth of elais palm and banana,
     and each separated from the other by thick bush.

     "Every three or four miles there were small villages visible on
     either bank, but we met with no disturbance, fortunately. At 5 P.M.
     we made for a small village called Kali-Karero, and camped there,
     the natives having retired peacefully. In half an hour they
     returned, and the ceremony of brotherhood was entered upon, which
     insured a peaceful night. The inhabitants of Rukura, opposite us,
     also approached us with confidence, and an interchange of small
     gifts served us as a healthy augury for the future.

     "On the morning of the 29th, accompanied by a couple of natives in
     a small fishing-canoe, we descended the river along the left bank,
     and, after about four miles, arrived at the confluence of the
     Kasuku, a dark-water stream of a hundred yards' width at the mouth.
     Opposite the mouth, at the southern end of Kaimba--a long wooded
     island on the right bank, and a little above the confluence--stands
     the important village of Kisanga-Sanga.

     "Below Kaimba Island and its neighbor, the Livingstone assumes a
     breadth of eighteen hundred yards. The banks are very populous: the
     villages of the left bank comprise the district of Luavala. We
     thought for some time we should be permitted to pass by quietly,
     but soon the great wooden drums, hollowed out of huge trees,
     thundered the signal along the river that there were strangers. In
     order to lessen all chances of a rupture between us, we sheered off
     to the middle of the river, and quietly lay on our paddles. But
     from both banks at once, in fierce concert, the natives, with their
     heads gayly feathered, and armed with broad black wooden shields
     and long spears, dashed out towards us.

     [Illustration: WAR-DRUMS OF THE TRIBES OF THE UPPER LIVINGSTONE.]

     "Tippu-Tib before our departure had hired to me two young men of
     Ukusu--cannibals--as interpreters. These were now instructed to cry
     out the word 'Sennenneh' ('Peace!'), and to say that we were
     friends.

     "But they would not reply to our greeting, and in a bold,
     peremptory manner told us to return.

     "'But we are doing no harm, friends. It is the river that takes us
     down, and the river will not stop, or go back.'

     "'This is our river.'

     "'Good. Tell it to take us back, and we will go.'

     "'If you do not go back, we will fight you.'

     "'No, don't; we are friends.'

     "'We don't want you for our friends; we will eat you.'

     "But we persisted in talking to them, and, as their curiosity was
     so great, they persisted in listening, and the consequence was that
     the current conveyed us near to the right bank; and in such near
     neighborhood to another district that our discourteous escort had
     to think of themselves, and began to skurry hastily up river,
     leaving us unattacked.

     "The villages on the right bank also maintained a tremendous
     drumming and blowing of war-horns, and their wild men hurried up
     with menace towards us, urging their sharp-prowed canoes so swiftly
     that they seemed to skim over the water like flying fish. Unlike
     the Luavala villagers, they did not wait to be addressed, but as
     soon as they came within fifty or sixty yards they shot out their
     spears, crying out, 'Meat! meat! Ah! ha! We shall have plenty of
     meat!'

     "There was a fat-bodied wretch in a canoe, whom I allowed to crawl
     within spear-throw of me; who, while he swayed the spear with a
     vigor far from assuring to one who stood within reach of it, leered
     with such a clever hideousness of feature that I felt, if only
     within arm's-length of him, I could have bestowed upon him a
     hearty thump on the back, and cried out applaudingly, 'Bravo, old
     boy! You do it capitally!'

     [Illustration: VILLAGE SCENE.]

     "Yet not being able to reach him, I was rapidly being fascinated by
     him. The rapid movements of the swaying spear, the steady,
     wide-mouthed grin, the big square teeth, the head poised on one
     side with the confident pose of a practised spear-thrower, the
     short brow and square face, hair short and thick. Shall I ever
     forget him? It appeared to me as if the spear partook of the same
     cruel, inexorable look as the grinning savage. Finally, I saw him
     draw his right arm back, and his body incline backward, with still
     that same grin on his face, and I felt myself begin to count, one,
     two, three, four--and _whiz_! The spear flew over my back, and
     hissed as it pierced the water. The spell was broken.

     "It was only five minutes' work clearing the river. We picked up
     several shields, and I gave orders that all shields should be
     henceforth religiously preserved, for the idea had entered my head
     that they would answer capitally as bulwarks for our canoes. An
     hour after this we passed close to the confluence of the Urindi--a
     stream four hundred yards in width at the mouth, and deep with
     water of a light color, and tolerably clear.

     "We continued down river along the right bank, and at 4 P.M. camped
     in a dense low jungle, the haunt of the hippopotamus and elephant
     during the dry season. When the river is in flood a much larger
     tract must be under water.

     "The traveller's first duty in lands infested by lions and leopards
     is to build a safe corral, kraal, or boma, for himself, his oxen,
     horses, servants; and in lands infested like Usongora Meno and
     Kasera--wherein we now were--by human lions and leopards, the duty
     became still more imperative. We drew our canoes, therefore,
     half-way upon the banks, and our camp was in the midst of an
     impenetrable jungle.

     "At dawn we embarked, and descended about two miles, close to the
     right bank, when, lo! the broad mouth of the magnificent Lowwa, or
     Rowwa, River burst upon the view. It was over a thousand yards
     wide, and its course by compass was from the southeast, or
     east-southeast true. A sudden rain-storm compelled us to camp on
     the north bank, and here we found ourselves under the shadows of
     the primeval forest.

     [Illustration: MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS AND MODE OF PLAYING.]

     "About ten o'clock, as we cowered in most miserable condition under
     the rude, leafy shelters we had hastily thrown up, the people of
     the wooded bluffs of Iryamba, opposite the Lowwa confluence, came
     over to see what strange beings were those who had preferred the
     secrecy of the uninhabited grove to their own loud, roystering
     society. Stock-still we sat cowering in our leafy coverts, but the
     mild, reproachful voice of Katembo, our cannibal interpreter, was
     heard laboring in the interests of peace, brotherhood, and
     good-will. The rain pattered so incessantly that I could from my
     position only faintly hear Katembo's voice pleading, earnestly yet
     mildly, with his unsophisticated brothers of Iryamba, but I felt
     convinced from the angelic tones that they would act as a sedative
     on any living creature except a rhinoceros or a crocodile. The
     long-drawn bleating sound of the word 'Sen-nen-neh,' which I heard
     frequently uttered by Katembo, I studied until I became quite as
     proficient in it as he himself.

     "Peace was finally made between Katembo on the one hand and the
     canoe-men of Iryamba on the other, and they drew near to gaze at
     their leisure at one of the sallow white men, who with great hollow
     eyes peered from under the visor of his cap, on the well-fed,
     bronze-skinned aborigines.

     "At 2 P.M. we left our camp in the forest of Luru, and pulled
     across to the Iryamba side of the Livingstone. But as soon as the
     rain had ceased a strong breeze had risen, which, when we were in
     mid-river, increased to a tempest from the north, and created
     great, heavy waves, which caused the foundering of two of our
     canoes, the drowning of two of our men, Farjalla Baraka, and Nasib,
     and the loss of four muskets and one sack of beads. Half a dozen
     other canoes were in great danger for a time, but no more fatal
     accidents occurred.

     "I feared lest this disaster might cause the people to rebel and
     compel me to return, for it had shocked them greatly; but I was
     cheered; to hear them remark that the sudden loss of their comrades
     had been ordained by fate, and that no precautions would have
     availed to save them. But though omens and auguries were delivered
     by the pessimists among us, not one hazarded aloud the belief that
     we ought to relinquish our projects; yet they were all evidently
     cowed by our sudden misfortune.

     "On the 31st, the last day of the year 1876, we resumed our voyage.
     The morning was beautiful, the sky blue and clear, the tall forest
     still and dark, the river flowed without a ripple, like a solid
     mass of polished silver. Everything promised fair. But from the
     island below, the confluence of the Lowwa and the Livingstone, the
     warning drum sounded loudly over the river, and other drums soon
     echoed the dull boom.

     "'Keep together, my men,' I cried, 'there may be hot work for us
     below.'

     "We resolved to keep in mid-stream, because both the island and the
     left bank appeared to be extremely populous, and to paddle slowly
     and steadily down river. The canoes of the natives darted from
     either shore, and there seemed to be every disposition made for a
     furious attack; but as we drew near we shouted out to them,
     'Friends, Sennenneh! Keep away from us. We shall not hurt you; but
     don't lift your spears, or we'll fight.'

     "There was a moment's hesitation, wherein spears were clashed
     against shields, and some fierce words uttered, but finally the
     canoes drew back, and as we continued to paddle, the river with its
     stiff current soon bore us down rapidly past the populous district
     and island.

     "At noon we came to the southern end of an uninhabited low and
     sandy island, where I ascertained the latitude to be south 1Â° 20'
     3". The altitude, above sea level, of the river at this place is
     1729 feet. After descending some five miles we formed our camp in
     the woods on the right bank.

     "The beginning of the new year, 1877, commenced, the first three
     hours after sunrise, with a delicious journey past an uninhabited
     tract, when my mind, wearied with daily solicitude, found rejoice
     in dwelling musingly upon the deep slumber of nature. Outwardly the
     forest was all beauty, solemn peace, and soft, dreamy rest,
     tempting one to sentiment and mild melancholy. Though it was in
     vain to endeavor to penetrate with our eyes into the dense wall of
     forest--black and impervious to the sunlight which almost seemed
     to burn up the river--what could restrain the imagination? These
     were my calm hours; periods when my heart, oblivious of the dark
     and evil days we had passed, resolutely closed itself against all
     dismal forebodings, and revelled in the exquisite stillness of the
     uninhabited wilderness.

     [Illustration: GORILLAS AND NEST.]

     "But soon after nine o'clock we discovered we were approaching
     settlements, both on islands and on the banks, and again the hoarse
     war-drums awakened the echoes of the forest, boomed along the
     river, and quickened our pulses.

     "We descend in close order as before, and steadily pursue our way.
     But, heading us off, about ten long canoes dart out from the shadow
     of palmy banks, and the wild crews begin to chant their war-songs,
     and now and then, in attitudes of bravado and defiance, raise
     spears and shields aloft and bring them downward with sounding
     clash.

     "As we approached them we shouted out 'Sen-nen-neh'--our Sesame and
     Shibboleth, our watchword and countersign. But they would not
     respond.

     "Hitherto they had called us Wasambye; we were now called Wajiwa
     (people of the sun?); our guns were called Katadzi, while before
     they were styled Kibongeh, or lightning. Katembo was implored to be
     eloquent, mild of voice, pacific in gesture.

     "They replied, 'We shall eat Wajiwa meat to-day. Oho, we shall eat
     Wajiwa meat!' and then an old chief gave some word of command, and
     at once one hundred paddles beat the water into foam, and the
     canoes darted at us. But the contest was short, and we were
     permitted to pursue our voyage.

     [Illustration: NATIVE PIPE.]

     "Farther down we met some friendly natives, who told us that we
     should soon come to the territory of the Mwana Ntaba, with whom we
     should have to fight; that the Mwana Ntaba people occupied the
     country as far as the falls; that below the falls were several
     islands inhabited by the Baswa, who were friends of the Mwana
     Ntaba. It would be impossible, they said, to go over the falls, as
     the river swept against a hill, and rolled over it, and tumbled
     down, down, down, with whirl and uproar, and we should inevitably
     get lost. It would be far better, they said, for us to return.

     "About two o'clock, in the afternoon of January 4th, as we were
     proceeding quietly, our vessels being only about thirty yards from
     the right bank, eight men with shields darted into view from behind
     a bush-clump, and, shouting their war-cries, launched their wooden
     spears. Some of them struck and dinted the boat deeply, others flew
     over it. We shoved off instantly, and getting into mid-stream found
     that we had heedlessly exposed ourselves to the watchful tribe of
     Mwana Ntaba, who immediately sounded their great drums, and
     prepared their numerous canoes for battle.

     [Illustration: SCENE ON A TRIBUTARY OF THE GREAT RIVER--LAUNCHING A
     CANOE.]

     "Up to this time we had met with no canoes over fifty feet long,
     but those which now issued from the banks and the shelter of bends
     in the banks were monstrous. The natives were in full war-paint,
     one half of their bodies being daubed white, the other half red,
     with broad black bars, the _tout ensemble_ being unique and
     diabolical. There was a crocodilian aspect about these lengthy
     vessels which was far from assuring, while the fighting-men,
     standing up alternately with the paddlers, appeared to be animated
     with a most ferocious cat-o'-mountain spirit. Horn-blasts, which
     reverberated from bank to bank, sonorous drums, and a chorus of
     loud yells, lent a fierce _Ã©clat_ to the fight in which we were now
     about to be engaged.

     [Illustration: MWANA NTABA CANOE (THE "CROCODILE").]

     "We formed line, and having arranged all our shields as bulwarks
     for the non-combatants, awaited the first onset with apparent
     calmness. One of the largest canoes, which we afterwards found to
     be eighty-five feet three inches in length, rashly made the mistake
     of singling out the _Lady Alice_ for its victim; but we reserved
     our fire until it was within fifty feet of us, and after pouring a
     volley into the crew charged the canoe with the boat, and the crew,
     unable to turn her round sufficiently soon to escape, precipitated
     themselves into the river and swam to their friends, while we made
     ourselves masters of the _Great Eastern_ of the Livingstone. We
     soon exchanged two of our smaller canoes and manned the monster
     with thirty men, and resumed our journey in line, the boat in front
     acting as a guide. This early disaster to the Mwana Ntaba caused
     them to hurry down river, blowing their horns, and alarming with
     their drums both shores of the river, until about forty canoes were
     seen furiously dashing down stream, no doubt bent on mischief.

     "At 4 P.M. we came opposite a river about two hundred yards wide,
     which I have called the Leopold River, in honor of His Majesty
     Leopold II., King of the Belgians, and which the natives called
     either the Kankora, Mikonju, or Munduku.

     "Soon after passing by the confluence, the Livingstone, which above
     had been two thousand five hundred yards wide, perceptibly
     contracted, and turned sharply to the east-northeast, because of a
     hill which rose on the left bank about three hundred feet above the
     river. Close to the elbow of the bend on the right bank we passed
     by some white granite rocks, from one to six feet above the water,
     and just below these we heard the roar of the first cataract of the
     Stanley Falls series.

     [Illustration: VILLAGE NEAR THE FOREST.]

     "But louder than the noise of the falls rose the piercing yells of
     the savage Mwana Ntaba from both sides of the great river. We now
     found ourselves confronted by the inevitable necessity of putting
     into practice the resolution which we had formed before setting out
     on the wild voyage--to conquer or die. What shall we do? Shall we
     turn and face the fierce cannibals, who with hideous noise drown
     the solemn roar of the cataract, or shall we cry out, 'Mambu Kwa
     Mungu' 'Our fate is in the hands of God'--and risk the cataract
     with its terrors?

     "Meanwhile we are sliding smoothly to our destruction, and a
     decision must therefore be arrived at instantly. God knows, I and
     my fellows would rather have it not to do, because possibly it is
     only a choice of deaths, by cruel knives or drowning. If we do not
     choose the knives, which are already sharpened for our throats,
     death by drowning is certain. So, finding ourselves face to face
     with the inevitable, we turn to the right bank upon the savages,
     who are in the woods and on the water. We drop our anchors and
     begin the fight, but after fifteen minutes of it find that we
     cannot force them away. We then pull up anchors and ascend stream
     again, until, arriving at the elbow above mentioned, we strike
     across the river and divide our forces. Mwana Sera is to take four
     canoes and to continue up stream a little distance, and, while we
     occupy the attention of the savages in front, is to lead his men
     through the woods and set upon them in rear. At 5.30 P.M. we make
     the attempt, and keep them in play for a few minutes, and on
     hearing a shot in the woods dash at the shore, and under a shower
     of spears and arrows effect a landing. From tree to tree the fight
     is continued until sunset, when, having finally driven the enemy
     off, we have earned peace for the night.

     "Until about 10 P.M. we are busy constructing an impenetrable
     stockade or boma of brushwood, and then at length we lay our sorely
     fatigued bodies down to rest, without comforts of any kind and
     without fires, but (I speak for myself only) with a feeling of
     gratitude to Him who has watched over us in our trouble, and a
     humble prayer that His protection may be extended to us for the
     terrible days that may yet be to come."

     [Illustration: NATIVE CORN-MAGAZINE.]




CHAPTER XII.

ATTACKED BY THE COMBINED FORCES OF THE MWANA NTABA AND BASWA
TRIBES.--THEY ARE REPULSED.--EXPLORING THE FIRST CATARACT.--CARRYING AND
DRAGGING THE BOATS THROUGH THE FOREST AND AROUND THE FALLS.--AN ISLAND
CAMP.--NATIVE WEAPONS AND UTENSILS.--ANOTHER BATTLE.--HOW ZAIDI WAS
SAVED FROM A PERILOUS POSITION.--CAUGHT IN A NET.--HOW THE NET WAS
BROKEN.--FISHES IN THE GREAT RIVER.--HOW THE OTHER CATARACTS WERE
PASSED.--AFLOAT ON SMOOTH WATER.--A HOSTILE VILLAGE.--ANOTHER
BATTLE.--ATTACKED BY A LARGE FLOTILLA.--A MONSTER BOAT.--A TEMPLE OF
IVORY.--NO MARKET FOR ELEPHANTS' TUSKS.--EVIDENCES OF
CANNIBALISM.--FRIENDLY NATIVES OF RUBUNGA.--PORTUGUESE MUSKETS IN THE
HANDS OF THE NATIVES.


Fred paused a few moments and then resumed the narrative:

     "At 4 A.M. of the 5th of January we were awake, cooking betimes the
     food that was to strengthen us for the task that lay before us,
     while the screaming lemur and the soko still alarmed the dark
     forest with their weird cries.

     [Illustration: AFRICAN STOOL.]

     "We were left undisturbed until 8 A.M., when the canoes of the
     Mwana Ntaba were observed to cross over to the left bank, and in
     response to their signals the forest behind our camp was soon alive
     with wild men. Frank distributed thirty rounds to each of the
     forty-three guns which now remained to us. Including my own guns,
     we possessed only forty-eight altogether, as Manwa Sera had lost
     four Sniders in the Ukassa Rapid, and by the capsizing of the two
     canoes in the tempest which struck us as we crossed the Livingstone
     below its confluence with the Lowwa, we had lost four muskets. But
     more terrible for our enemies than Sniders or muskets was the
     courage of despair that now nerved every heart and kept cool and
     resolute every head.

     "By river the cannibals had but little chance of success, and this
     the Mwana Ntaba after a very few rounds from our guns discovered;
     they therefore allied themselves with the Baswa tribe, which during
     the night had crossed over from its islands, below the first falls.
     Until 10 A.M. we held our own safely in the camp, but then,
     breaking out of it, we charged on the foe, and until 3 P.M. were
     incessantly at work. Ten of our men received wounds, and two were
     killed. To prevent them becoming food for the cannibals, we
     consigned them to the swift brown flood of the Livingstone.

     "The Mwana Ntaba and the Baswas at length retired, and though we
     momentarily expected a visit from them each day, for the next two
     or three days we were unmolested.

     "Early on the morning of the 6th I began to explore the first
     cataract of the Stanley Falls. I found a small stream about two
     hundred yards wide, separated by a lateral dyke of igneous rocks
     from the main stream, which took the boat safely down for a couple
     of miles. Then presently other dykes appeared, some mere low,
     narrow ridges of rock, and others, much larger and producing tall
     trees, inhabited by the Baswa tribe. Among these islets the left
     stream rushed down in cascades or foamy sheets, over low terraces,
     with a fall of from one foot to ten feet. The Baswas, no doubt, had
     recently fled to these islets to seek refuge from some powerful
     tribe situated inland west of the river.

     "The main stream, nine hundred yards wide, rushed towards the
     east-northeast, and, after a mile of rapids, tilted itself against
     a hilly ridge that lay north and south, the crest of which was
     probably three hundred feet above the river. With my glass, from
     the fork of a tree twenty feet above the ground, I saw at once that
     a descent by the right side was an impossibility, as the waves were
     enormous, and the slope so great that the river's face was all
     a-foam; and that at the base of the hilly ridge which obstructed
     its course the river seemed piling itself into a watery bank,
     whence it escaped into a scene of indescribable confusion down to
     the horror of whirling pools and a mad confluence of tumbling,
     rushing waters.

     "I decided, therefore, to go down along the left stream, overland,
     and to ascertain the best route I took eight men with me, leaving
     five to guard the boat. Within two hours we had explored the
     jungle, and 'blazed' a path below the falls--a distance of two
     miles.

     "Then, returning to camp, I sent Frank off with a detachment of
     fifty men with axes to clear the path, and a musket-armed guard of
     fifteen men, to be stationed in the woods parallel with the
     projected land route, and, leaving a guard of twenty men to protect
     the camp, I myself rowed up river along the left bank, a distance
     of three miles.

     [Illustration: SPEAR-HEAD.]

     "By noon of the 7th, having descended with the canoes as near as
     prudence would permit to the first fall of the left stream, we were
     ready for hauling the canoes overland. A road, fifteen feet in
     width, had been cut through the tangle of rattan, palms, vines,
     creepers, and brushwood, tolerably straight except where great
     forest monarchs stood untouched, and whatever brushwood had been
     cut from the jungle had been laid across the road in thick piles. A
     rude camp had also been constructed half-way on the river side of
     the road, into which everything was conveyed. By 8 P.M. we had
     hauled the canoes over one mile of ground.

     [Illustration: THE KOOLOO-KAMBA, OR LONG EARED SOKO.]

     "The next day, while the people were still fresh, we buckled on to
     the canoes, and by 3 P.M. of the 8th had passed the falls and
     rapids of the first cataract, and were afloat in a calm creek
     between Baswa Island and the left bank!

     [Illustration: A BASWA KNIFE.]

     "Not wishing to stay in such a dangerous locality longer than was
     absolutely necessary, we re-embarked, and, descending cautiously
     down the creek, came in a short time to the great river, with every
     prospect of a good stretch of serene water. But soon we heard the
     roar of another cataract, and had to hug the left bank closely.
     Then we entered other creeks, which wound lazily by jungle-covered
     islets, and, after two miles of meanderings among most dismal
     islands and banks, emerged in view of the great river, with the
     cataract's roar sounding solemnly and terribly near. As it was near
     evening, and our position was extremely unpleasant, we resolved to
     camp for the night at an island which lay in mid-stream. The
     inhabitants fled as we approached.

     [Illustration: STYLE OF KNIVES.]

     "During the morning of the 9th we explored the island of Cheandoah,
     where we were encamped, and found it much longer than we at first
     supposed. It was extremely populous, and contained five villages.
     We discovered an abundance of spears here and iron-ware of all
     kinds used by the natives, such as knives, hammers, hatchets,
     tweezers, anvils of iron, or, in other words, inverted hammers,
     borers, pole-burners, fish-hooks, darts, iron rods; all the spears
     possessed broad points, and were the first of this style I had
     seen. Almost all the knives, large and small, were encased in
     sheaths of wood covered with goat-skin, and ornamented with
     polished iron bands. They varied in size, from a butcher's cleaver
     to a lady's dirk, and belts of undressed goat-skin, of red buffalo
     or antelope hide, were attached to them for suspension from the
     shoulders. There were also iron bells, like our cow and goat bells,
     curiously carved whistles, fetiches or idols of wood, uncouth and
     rudely cut figures of human beings, brightly painted in vermilion,
     alternating with black; baskets made of palm fibre, large wooden
     and dark clay pipes, iron rings for arms and legs, numerous
     treasures of necklaces of the _Achatina monetaria_, the black seeds
     of a species of plantain, and the crimson berries of the _Abrus
     precatorius_; copper, iron, and wooden pellets. The houses were all
     of the gable-roofed pattern, which we had first noticed on the
     summit of the hills on which Riba-Riba, Manyema, is situate; the
     shields of the Baswa were also after the same type.

     [Illustration: BASWA BASKET AND COVER.]

     "The vegetation of the island consisted of almost every variety of
     plant and tree found in this region, and the banana, plantain,
     castor-bean, sugar-cane, cassava, and maize flourished; nor must
     the oil-palm be forgotten, for there were great jars of its
     dark-red butter in many houses."

[Illustration: SHOOTING A CROCODILE AT THE RAPIDS.]

"The natives on the mainland," said Fred, raising his eyes from the book
for a few moments, "opposed the explorers, and a sharp fight followed,
with the same result as at the first cataract. The boats were dragged
overland around the worst of the falls, and then lowered through the
last rapid by means of ropes. This rapid was separated by an islet from
a steep fall which was impassable by the boats. A canoe was swept over
this fall and one of its crew drowned; the rest were rescued by Frank
Pocock and some of the land party who were below the fall.

[Illustration: CAVERN NEAR STANLEY FALLS.]

"Just before the boat made its leap over the fall, Zaidi, its captain,
sprang into the water and caught upon a rock where he clung until Mr.
Stanley devised and executed a plan for his rescue. Strong cables were
made from rattans cut in the forest; two cables were attached to a
canoe, one at its bow and the other at the stern, and then the canoe,
manned by Uledi, the coxswain of the _Lady Alice_, and a youth named
Marzouk, was lowered carefully down the current until the unhappy man
was reached. It was a position of great peril, and the rescue of the
poor fellow was due to the skill of the leader of the expedition and the
bravery of Uledi and Marzouk.

[Illustration: THE DESPERATE SITUATION OF ZAIDI, AND HIS RESCUE BY
ULEDI, THE COXSWAIN OF THE BOAT.]

"Seven cataracts in all were passed," said Fred, "some of them by
lowering the boats through rapids and others by cutting roads through
the forest and dragging the craft overland. Some of the natives along
the route were peaceable, but the majority of the tribes and villages
were hostile. Mr. Stanley always exhausted all possible efforts at
peace, and never fought them until the natives themselves struck the
first blow. A short battle was usually sufficient to convince the
savages of the futility of opposition. At one place a strong net was
drawn around the camp by the natives during the night, in the same
manner that nets are drawn for hunting game in various parts of Africa.
But the savages found that the plan so effective against wild animals
did not work well against the expedition, as the net was cut to pieces
by those whom it enclosed.

[Illustration: THE SEVENTH CATARACT, STANLEY FALLS.]

"The passage of the cataracts and rapids which comprise the Stanley
Falls occupied twenty-two days. At the seventh cataract there was a
fish-weir, and Mr. Stanley made drawings of several fishes that were
caught there. Below Stanley Falls the river spread out again and
presented no obstacles to navigation until Stanley Pool was reached, a
distance of several hundred miles.

[Illustration: PIKE--STANLEY FALLS.]

"And now," said Fred, "you shall hear from Mr. Stanley about this part
of the great river:

[Illustration: AN AFRICAN SUSPENSION BRIDGE.]

     "We hastened away down river in a hurry, to escape the noise of the
     cataracts which, for many days and nights, had almost stunned us
     with their deafening sound.

     "The Livingstone now deflected to the west-northwest, between hilly
     banks--

            "'Where highest woods, impenetrable
  To star, or sunlight, spread their umbrage broad
  And brown as evening.'

     [Illustration: FISH--SEVENTH CATARACT, STANLEY FALLS.

     28 inches long; 16 inches round body; round snout; no teeth; broad
     tail; large scales; color, pale brown.]

     "We are once again afloat upon a magnificent stream, whose broad
     and gray-brown waters woo us with their mystery. We are not a whit
     dejected after our terrible experiences; we find our reward in
     being alive to look upon wild nature, and a strange elasticity
     comes over us. The boat-boys amuse me by singing their most
     animating song, to which every member of our expedition responds
     with enthusiasm. The men, women, and children are roused to
     maintain that reckless, exuberant spirit which assisted me to drive
     through the cannibal region of the Stanley Falls, for otherwise
     they might lose that dash and vigor on which depends our success.
     They are apt, if permitted thinking-time, to brood upon our
     situation, to become disquieted and melancholy, to reflect on the
     fate of those who have already been lost, and to anticipate a like
     dolorous ending to their own lives.

     [Illustration: BASWA PALM-OIL JAR AND PALM-WINE COOLER.]

     "At noon, on the 29th, when approaching a large village, we were
     again assaulted by the aborigines. We drove them back, and obtained
     a peaceful passage past them, until 1 P.M. From 1 P.M. we were
     engaged with a new tribe, which possessed very large villages, and
     maintained a running fight with us until 4 P.M., when, observing
     the large village of Ituka below us, and several canoes cutting
     across river to head us off, we resolved to make our stand on the
     shore. Material for constructing a boma was soon discovered in the
     outlying houses of the village, and by five o'clock we were
     tolerably secure on the edge of the steep banks--all obstructions
     cleared away on the land side, and a perfect view of the river
     front and shore below us.

     [Illustration: MOUTH OF DRUM.]

     "The savages were hideously bepainted for war, one half of their
     bodies being white, the other ochreous. Their shields were oblong
     squares, beautifully made of rattan-cane, light, tough, and, to
     spears and knives, impenetrable. A square slab of ebony wood with a
     cleat, and one long thin board placed lengthways, and another
     crossways, sufficed to stiffen them. Shouting their
     war-cries--'Ya-Mariwa! Ya-Mariwa!'--they rushed on our boma fences
     like a herd of buffaloes several times, in one of which charges
     Muftah Rufiji was killed, and another man received a wound from a
     spear, which glanced along his back. As the heavy spears hurtled
     through the boma, or flew over it, very many of us had extremely
     narrow escapes. Frank, for instance, avoided one by giving his body
     a slight jerk on one side. We, of course, had the advantage, being
     protected by doors, roofs of houses, poles, brushwood, and our
     great Mwana Ntaba shields, which had been of invaluable use to us,
     and had often in the heat of fights saved us and made us almost
     invulnerable.

     [Illustration: WOODEN SIGNAL-DRUM OF THE WENYA, OR WAGENYA, AND THE
     TRIBES ON THE LIVINGSTONE.]

     "From the Ruiki River up to this afternoon of the 29th of January
     we had fought twenty-four times, and out of these struggles we had
     obtained sixty-five doorlike shields, which upon the commencement
     of a fight on the river at all times had been raised by the women,
     children, and non-combatants as bulwarks before the riflemen, from
     behind which, cool and confident, the forty-three guns were of more
     avail than though there were one hundred and fifty riflemen
     unprotected. The steersmen, likewise protected, were enabled to
     steer their vessels with the current while we were engaged in these
     running fights. Against the spears and arrows the shields were
     impervious.

     [Illustration: DRUMSTICKS, KNOBS BEING OF INDIA-RUBBER.]

     "About ten o'clock of the 30th another conflict began, in the usual
     way, by a determined assault on us in canoes. By charging under
     cover of our shields we captured one canoe and eight men, and
     withdrew to a low grassy islet opposite Yangambi, a settlement
     consisting of five populous villages. We had discovered by this
     that nothing cowed the natives so much as a capture, and as it was
     the most bloodless mode of settling what might have been a
     protracted affair, I had adopted it. Through our captives we were
     enabled to negotiate for an unmolested passage, though it involved
     delay and an expenditure of lung force that was very trying; still,
     as it ended satisfactorily in many ways, it was preferable to
     continued fighting. It also increased our opportunities of knowing
     who our antagonists were, and to begin an acquaintance with these
     long-buried peoples.

     [Illustration: SHIELDS OF ITUKA PEOPLE.]

     "When the natives observed us preparing to halt on the grassy islet
     directly opposite their villages, with their unfortunate friends in
     our power, they withdrew to their villages to consult. The distance
     between our grassy islet and the right bank was only five hundred
     yards, and, as it was the eastern bank, the sun shone direct on
     them, enabling me, with the aid of a field-glass, to perceive even
     the differences of feature between one man and another.

     [Illustration: FISH--STANLEY FALLS.

     Fine scales; weight, 23 lbs.; thick, broad snout; 26 small teeth in
     upper jaw, 23 teeth in lower jaw; broad tongue; head, 11 inches
     long.]

     "We placed our captives in their canoe, and, giving each a few
     shells, motioned them to depart. As the warriors on the bank saw
     their friends return, they all gathered round the landing-place,
     and, as they landed, asked scores of questions, the replies to
     which elicited loud grunts of approval and wonder. The drumming
     gradually ceased, the war-cries were heard no more, the people left
     their processions to crowd round their countrymen, and the enormous
     spear-blades no longer flashed their brightness on us. We waited
     about an hour, and, taking it for granted that after such a signal
     instance of magnanimity they would not resume their hostile
     demeanor, we quietly embarked, and glided down river unopposed.

     "At a little after noon, on February 1st, we were attacked by a
     larger force of canoes than on any previous occasion. We were
     passing the mouth of the Aruwimi River, where there was a great
     concourse of canoes hovering about some islets which stud the
     middle of the stream. The canoe-men, standing up, give a loud shout
     as they discern us, and blow their horns louder than ever. We pull
     briskly on to gain the right bank, when, looking up stream, we see
     a sight that sends the blood tingling through every nerve and fibre
     of the body, arouses not only our most lively interest, but also
     our most lively apprehensions--a flotilla of gigantic canoes
     bearing down upon us, which both in size and numbers utterly
     eclipse anything encountered hitherto! Instead of aiming for the
     right bank, we form in line, and keep straight down river, the boat
     taking position behind. Yet after a moment's reflection, as I note
     the numbers of the savages, and the daring manner of the pursuit,
     and the apparent desire of our canoes to abandon the steady,
     compact line, I give the order to drop anchor. Four of our canoes
     affect not to listen, until I chase them, and threaten them with my
     guns. This compelled them to return to the line, which is formed of
     eleven double canoes, anchored ten yards apart. The boat moves up
     to the front, and takes position fifty yards above them. The
     shields are next lifted by the non-combatants, men, women, and
     children, in the bows and along the outer lines, as well as astern,
     and from behind these the muskets and rifles are aimed.

     "We have sufficient time to take a view of the mighty force bearing
     down on us, and to count the number of the war-vessels which have
     been collected from the Livingstone and its great affluent. There
     are fifty-four of them! A monster canoe leads the way, with two
     rows of upstanding paddles, forty men on a side, their bodies
     bending and swaying in unison as with a swelling barbarous chorus
     they drive her down towards us. In the bow, standing on what
     appears to be a platform, are ten prime young warriors, their heads
     gay with feathers of the parrot, crimson and gray; at the stern,
     eight men, with long paddles, whose tops are decorated with ivory
     balls, guide the monster vessel; and dancing up and down from stem
     to stern are ten men, who appear to be chiefs. All the paddles are
     headed with ivory balls, every head bears a feather crown, every
     arm shows gleaming white ivory armlets. From the bow of the canoe
     streams a thick fringe of the long white fibre of the Hyphene palm.
     The crashing sound of large drums, a hundred blasts from ivory
     horns, and a thrilling chant from two thousand human throats, do
     not tend to soothe our nerves or to increase our confidence.
     However, it is 'neck or nothing.' We have no time to pray, or to
     take sentimental looks at the savage world, or even to breathe a
     sad farewell to it. So many other things have to be done speedily
     and well.

     "As the foremost canoe comes rushing down, its consorts on either
     side beating the water into foam and raising their jets of water
     with their sharp prows, I turn to take a last look at our people,
     and say to them:

     "'Boys, be firm as iron; wait until you see the first spear, and
     then take good aim. Don't fire all at once. Keep aiming until you
     are sure of your man. Don't think of running away, for only your
     guns can save you.'

     "Frank is with the _Ocean_ on the right flank, and has a choice
     crew, and a good bulwark of black wooden shields. Manwa Sera has
     the _London Town_--which he has taken in charge instead of the
     _Glasgow_--on the left flank, the sides of the canoe bristling with
     guns, in the hands of tolerably steady men.

     [Illustration: MONSTER CANOE.]

     "The monster canoe aims straight for my boat, as though it would
     run us down; but, when within fifty yards off, swerves aside, and,
     when nearly opposite, the warriors above the manned prow let fly
     their spears, and on either side there is a noise of rushing
     bodies. But every sound is soon lost in the ripping, crackling
     musketry. For five minutes we are so absorbed in firing that we
     take no note of anything else; but at the end of that time we are
     made aware that the enemy is re-forming about two hundred yards
     above us.

     "Our blood is up now. It is a murderous world, and we feel for the
     first time that we hate the filthy, vulturous ghouls who inhabit
     it. We therefore lift our anchors, and pursue them up-stream along
     the right bank, until, rounding a point, we see their villages. We
     make straight for the banks, and continue the fight in the village
     streets with those who have landed, hunt them out into the woods,
     and there only sound the retreat, having returned the daring
     cannibals the compliment of a visit.

     "While mustering my people for re-embarkation, one of the men came
     forward and said that in the principal village there was a
     'Meskiti,' a 'pembÃ©'--a church, or temple--of ivory, and that ivory
     was 'as abundant as fuel.' In a few moments I stood before the
     ivory temple, which was merely a large circular roof supported by
     thirty-three tusks of ivory, erected over an idol four feet high,
     painted with camwood dye a bright vermilion, with black eyes and
     beard and hair. The figure was very rude, still it was an
     unmistakable likeness of a man. The tusks being wanted by the
     Wangwana, they received permission to convey them into the canoes.
     One hundred other pieces of ivory were collected, in the shape of
     log wedges, long ivory war-horns, ivory pestles to pound cassava
     into meal, and herbs for spinach, ivory armlets and balls, and
     ivory mallets to beat the fig-bark into cloth.

     [Illustration: NATIVE SPADE.]

     "The stores of beautifully carved paddles, ten feet in length, some
     of which were iron-pointed, the enormous six-feet-long spears,
     which were designed more for ornament than use, the splendid long
     knives, like Persian kummars, and bright iron-mounted sheaths with
     broad belts of red buffalo and antelope hide, barbed spears, from
     the light assegai to the heavy double-handed sword-spear, the
     tweezers, hammers, prickers, hole-burners, hairpins, fish-hooks,
     hammers, arm and leg-rings of iron and copper, iron beads and
     wrist-bands, iron bells, axes, war-hatchets, adzes, hoes, dibbers,
     etc., proved the people on the banks of this river to be clever,
     intelligent, and more advanced in the arts than any hitherto
     observed since we commenced our descent of the Livingstone. The
     architecture of their huts, however, was the same, except the
     conical structure they had erected over their idol. Their canoes
     were much larger than those of the Mwana Ntaba, above the Stanley
     Falls, which had crocodiles and lizards carved on them. Their
     skull-caps of basket-work, leopard, civet, and monkey skins, were
     similar to those that we had observed in Uregga. Their shields were
     like those of the Wariwa. There were various specimens of African
     wood-carving in great and small idols, stools of ingenious pattern,
     double benches, walk-staffs, spear-staffs, paddles, flutes,
     grain-mortars, mallets, drums, clubs, troughs, scoops and
     canoe-balers, paddles, porridge-spoons, etc. Gourds also exhibited
     taste in ornamentation. Their earthenware was very superior, their
     pipes of an unusual pattern--in short, everything that is of use to
     a well-found African village exhibited remarkable intelligence and
     prosperity.

     [Illustration: THE FIGHT BELOW THE CONFLUENCE OF THE ARUWIMI AND
     THE LIVINGSTONE RIVERS.]

     "Evidences of cannibalism were numerous in the human and 'soko'
     skulls that grinned on many poles, and the bones that were freely
     scattered in the neighborhood, near the village garbage heaps and
     the river banks, where one might suppose hungry canoe-men to have
     enjoyed a cold collation on an ancient matron's arm. As the most
     positive and downright evidence, in my opinion, of this hideous
     practice, was the thin forearm of a person that was picked up near
     a fire, with certain scorched ribs which might have been tossed
     into the fire after being gnawed. It is true that it is but
     circumstantial evidence, yet we accepted them as indubitable
     proofs. Besides, we had been taunted with remarks that we would
     furnish them with meat supplies--for the words _meat_ and _to-day_
     have but slight dialectic difference in many languages.

     [Illustration: SPEAR, ISANGI.]

     "We embarked in our canoes at 5 P.M., and, descending the affluent,
     came to the confluence again, and then, hugging the right bank,
     appeared before other villages; but after our successful resistance
     to such a confederation of chiefs and the combined strength of
     three or four different tribes, it was not likely that one small
     settlement would risk an encounter. For several days after this
     battle we had little opposition. We avoided the villages as much as
     possible, and by the 8th of February we were entirely out of
     provisions. On the 9th we camped on a grassy islet in front of a
     village called Rubunga, where, after a great deal of parleying, we
     bought a plentiful supply of bananas and other food. We made
     brotherhood with the chief, and had no trouble during our stay.

     [Illustration: KNIVES, RUBUNGA.]

     "The people of Rubunga carry knives which are singular specimens of
     the African smith's art, being principally of a waving
     sickle-shaped pattern, while the principal men carried
     brass-handled weapons, eighteen inches long, double-edged, and
     rather wide-pointed, with two blood channels along the centre of
     the broad blade, while near the hilt the blade was pierced by two
     quarter-circular holes, while the top of the haft was ornamented
     with the fur of the otter.

     "The aborigines dress their hair with an art peculiar to the Warua
     and Waguha, which consists in wearing it in tufts on the back of
     the head, and fastening it with elegantly shaped iron hairpins--a
     fashion which also obtains among many kitchen maids in England.
     Tattooing is carried to excess, every portion of the skin bearing
     punctured marks, from the roots of the hair down to the knees.
     Their breasts are like hieroglyphic parchment charts, marked with
     _raised_ figures, ledges, squares, circles, wavy lines, tuberose
     knots, rosettes, and every conceivable design. No coloring
     substance had been introduced into these incisions and punctures;
     the cuticle had simply been tortured and irritated by the injection
     of some irritants or air. Indeed, some of the glossy tubercles,
     which contained air, were as large as hens' eggs. As many as six
     thin ledges marked the foreheads from temple to temple, as many ran
     down each cheek, while from lower eyelid to base of septum curved
     wavy lines; the chin showed rosettes, the neck seemed goitrous with
     the large vesicular protuberances, while the front parts of their
     bodies afforded broad fields upon which the native artist had
     displayed the exuberant fertility of his genius. To such an extent
     is this fashion carried that the people are hideously deformed,
     many of them having quite unnatural features and necks.

     [Illustration: RINGS FOR PROTECTING THE ARM.]

     "To add to the atrocious bad taste of these aborigines, their
     necklaces consisted of human, gorilla, and crocodile teeth, in such
     quantity in many cases that little or nothing could be seen of the
     neck. A few possessed polished boars' tusks, with the points made
     to meet from each side.

     "The most curious objects we discovered at Rubunga were four
     ancient Portuguese muskets, at the sight of which the people of the
     expedition raised a glad shout. These appeared to them certain
     signs that we had not lost the road, that the great river did
     really reach the sea, and that their master was not deluding them
     when he told them that some day they would see the sea.

     "In reply to our questions as to where they had obtained them, they
     said from men in canoes from Bankaro, Bangaro, Mangara, or, as the
     word finally settled down, from Mangala, who came once a year to
     buy ivory. These traders were black men, and they had never heard
     of white men or of Arabs."

"We will now," said Fred, "leave you to pass the night among the people
of Rubunga, who seem friendly enough to warrant my trusting you with
them." The eager listeners took the hint thus conveyed and there was a
concerted movement towards the doorway.

[Illustration: RUBUNGA BLACKSMITHS.]




CHAPTER XIII.

IN URANGI.--A NOISY RECEPTION.--WONDERFUL HEAD-DRESSES.--A TREACHEROUS
ATTACK.--ANIMAL LIFE ALONG THE RIVER.--BIRDS AND BEASTS OF THE GREAT
STREAM.--A BATTLE WITH THE BANGALA.--FIRE-ARMS IN THE HANDS OF THE
NATIVES.--THE SAVAGES, ALTHOUGH IN SUPERIOR NUMBERS, ARE REPULSED.--HIGH
WINDS AND STORMS.--EFFECT OF THE CLIMATE ON MR. STANLEY'S HEALTH.--A
GREAT TRIBUTARY RIVER.--FRIENDLY PEOPLE OF IKENGO.--PROVISIONS IN
ABUNDANCE.--ISLANDS IN THE RIVER.--DEATH OF AMINA.--A MOURNFUL
SCENE.--THE LEVY HILLS.--HIPPOPOTAMUS CREEK.--BOLOBO.--THE KING OF
CHUMBIRI.--A CRAFTY POTENTATE.--HIS DRESS, PIPE, WIVES, AND
SONS.--INCONVENIENT COLLARS.--CURIOUS CUSTOMS.


It was Frank's turn to read on the next day, and, promptly at the
appointed hour, the reader and his audience were in their places.
Without any preliminary remarks, the youth plunged at once into the
midst of his subject.

[Illustration: DOUBLE IRON BELLS OF URANGI.]

     "On the morning of the 10th of February natives from down river
     appeared to escort us, and our friends of Rubunga also despatched a
     canoe and five men to introduce us to Urangi. In about two hours we
     arrived at the very populous settlement of Urangi, consisting of
     several villages almost joining one another. I doubt whether the
     people of Urangi and Rubunga are cannibals, though we obtained
     proof sufficient that human life is not a subject of concern with
     them, and the necklaces of human teeth which they wore were by no
     means assuring--they provoked morbid ideas.

     "We received a noisy and demonstrative welcome. In the afternoon
     the great chief of Urangi made his presence known by sounding his
     double iron gong. This gong consisted of two long, iron,
     bell-shaped instruments, connected above by an iron handle, which,
     when beaten with a short stick with a ball of india-rubber at the
     end, produced very agreeable musical sounds. He had a kindly
     reception, and though he manifested no desire or declared any
     intention of reciprocating our gift, he did not leave our camp
     dissatisfied with his present. He loudly proclaimed to the assembly
     in the river something to the effect that I was his brother; that
     peace and good-will should prevail, and that everybody should
     behave, and 'make plenty of trade.' But on his departure his people
     became roguish and like wild children. Scores of canoes flitted
     here and there, up and down, along the front of the camp, which
     gave us opportunities of observing that every person was tattooed
     in the most abominable manner; that the coiffeur's art was carried
     to perfection; that human teeth were popular ornaments for the
     neck; that their own teeth were filed; that brass wire to an
     astonishing quantity had been brought to them by the Bangala; as
     they had coils of it upon their arms and legs, and ruffs of it
     resting upon their shoulders; that while the men wore ample
     loin-coverings of grass-cloth, their women went naked; that ivory
     was to be purchased here to any amount, and that palm-wine had
     affected the heads of a great many. We also discovered that Urangi
     possessed about a dozen muskets.

     "During the night we heard drumming and the report of muskets, but
     were not otherwise disturbed. As we departed down the river in the
     morning we were treacherously attacked by a fleet of canoes, and
     had a hard fight to beat them off. Hitherto, on the river, we had
     only the arrows and spears of the natives to fear, but now they
     were using muskets.

     [Illustration: BEAK OF THE BALINÃ†CEPS REX.]

     "There was an abundance of animal life along the river. On the
     islands we saw several elephants; the river was full of crocodiles
     and hippopotami, and along the islands and banks there were flocks
     of storks, cranes, ducks, egrets, flamingoes, spur-winged geese,
     and other aquatic birds. We saw many fine specimens of the
     BalinÃ¦ceps Rex, identical with the one inhabiting the Upper Nile.
     He makes his home among the lotus-flowers and papyrus-plants, and
     is noticeable for his enormous beak.

     [Illustration: THE BALINÃ†CEPS REX.]

     "During the forenoon of the 14th of February, while anxiously
     looking out lest we should be taken by some erratic channels in
     view of other villages, we arrived at the end of an island, which,
     after some hesitation, we followed along the right. Two islands
     were to the right of us, and prevented us from observing the
     mainland. But after descending two miles we came in full view of a
     small settlement on the right bank. Too late to return, we crept
     along down river, hugging the island as closely as possible, in
     order to arrive at a channel before the natives should sight us.
     But, alas! even in the midst of our prayers for deliverance, sharp,
     quick taps on a native kettle-drum sent our blood bounding to the
     heart, and we listened in agony for the response. Presently one
     drum after another sounded the alarm, until the Titanic drums of
     war thundered the call to arms.

     "In very despair I sprang to my feet, and, addressing my distressed
     and long-suffering followers, said, 'It is of no use, my friends,
     to hope to escape these blood-thirsty pagans. Those drums mean war.
     Yet it is very possible these are the Bangala, in which case, being
     traders, they will have heard of the men by the sea, and a little
     present may satisfy the chiefs. Now, while I take the sun you
     prepare your guns, your powder and bullets; see that every shield
     is ready to lift at once, as soon as you see or hear one gun-shot.
     It is only in that way I can save you, for every pagan now, from
     here to the sea, is armed with a gun, and they are black like you,
     and they have a hundred guns to your one. If we must die, we will
     die with guns in our hands, like men. While I am speaking, and
     trying to make friendship with them, let no one speak or move.'

     "We drew ashore at the little island, opposite the highest village,
     and at noon I obtained by observation north latitude 1Â° 7' 0".
     Meanwhile savage madness was being heated by the thunder of drums,
     canoes were mustering, guns were being loaded, spears and
     broadswords were being sharpened, all against us, merely because we
     were strangers, and afloat on their waters. Yet we had the will and
     the means to purchase amity. We were ready to submit to any tax,
     imposition, or insolent demand for the privilege of a peaceful
     passage. Except life, or one drop of our blood, we would sacrifice
     anything.

     "Slowly and silently we withdrew from the shelter of the island and
     began the descent of the stream. The boat took position in front,
     Frank's canoe, the _Ocean_, on the right, Manwa Sera's, _London
     Town_, to the left. Beyond Manwa Sera's canoe was the uninhabited
     island, the great length of which had ensnared us and hedged us in
     to the conflict. From our right the enemy would appear with muskets
     and spears and an unquenchable ferocity, unless we could mollify
     him.

     "We had left Observation Island about half a mile behind us when
     the prows of many canoes were seen to emerge out of the creek. I
     stood up and edged towards them, holding a long piece of red cloth
     in one hand and a coil of brass wire in the other. We rested on our
     oars, and the men quietly placed their paddles in their canoes, and
     sat up, watchful, but ready for contingencies. As we floated down,
     numbers of canoes advanced.

     "I hailed the natives, who were the most brilliantly decorated of
     any yet seen. At a distance they all appeared to wear something
     like English University caps, though of a white color. There was a
     great deal of glitter and flash of metal, shining brass, copper,
     and bright steel among them.

     "The natives returned no answer to my hail; still I persisted, with
     the same artfulness of manner that had been so successful at
     Rubunga. I observed three or four canoes approaching Frank's vessel
     with a most suspicious air about them, and several of their canoes
     menacing him, at which Frank stood up and menaced them with his
     weapon. I thought the act premature, and ordered him to sit down
     and to look away from them. I again raised the crimson cloth and
     wire, and by pantomime offered to give it to those in front, whom I
     was previously addressing; but almost immediately those natives who
     had threatened Frank fired into my boat, wounding three of my young
     crew--Mambu, Murabo, and Jaffari--and two more natives fired into
     Frank's canoe, wounding two--Hatib and Muftah. The missiles fired
     into us were jagged pieces of iron and copper ore precisely similar
     to those which the Ashantees employed. After this murderous outrage
     there was no effort made to secure peace. The shields were lifted,
     and proved capital defences against the hail of slugs. Boat,
     shields, and canoes were pitted, but only a few shields were
     perforated.

     [Illustration: A CANNIBAL CHIEF.]

     "The conflict began in earnest, and lasted so long that ammunition
     had to be redistributed. We perceived that, as the conflict
     continued, every village sent out its quota. About two o'clock a
     canoe advanced with a swaggering air, its crew evidently
     intoxicated, and fired at us when within thirty yards. The boat
     instantly swept down to it and captured it, but the crew sprang
     into the river, and, being capital swimmers, were saved by a timely
     arrival of their friends. At three o'clock I counted sixty-three
     opposed to us. Some of the Bangala distinguished themselves by an
     audacity and courage that, for our own sakes, I was glad to see was
     not general. Especially one young chief, distinguished by his
     head-dress of white goat-skin and a short mantle of the same
     material, and wreaths of thick brass wire on neck, arms, and legs,
     sufficient, indeed, to have protected those parts from slugs, and
     proving him to be a man of consequence. His canoe-mates were ten in
     number; and his steersman, by his adroitness and dexterity, managed
     the canoe so well that, after he and his mates had fired their
     guns, he instantly presented its prow and only a thin line of
     upright figures to our aim. Each time he dashed up to deliver his
     fire all the canoes of his countrymen seemed stimulated by his
     example to emulate him. And, allowing five guns on an average to
     each of the sixty-three canoes, there were three hundred and
     fifteen muskets opposed to our forty-four. Their mistake was in
     supposing their slugs to have the same penetrative effect and long
     range as our missiles had. Only a few of the boldest approached,
     after they had experienced our fire, within a hundred yards. The
     young chief already mentioned frequently charged to within fifty
     yards, and delivered a smashing charge of missiles, almost all of
     which were either too low or too high. Finally Manwa Sera wounded
     him with a Snider bullet in the thigh. The brave fellow coolly, and
     in presence of us all, took a piece of cloth and deliberately
     bandaged it, and then calmly retreated towards shore. The action
     was so noble and graceful that orders were given to let him
     withdraw unmolested. After his departure the firing became
     desultory, and at 5.30 P.M. our antagonists retired, leaving us to
     attend to our wounded, and to give three hearty cheers at our
     success. This was our thirty-first fight on the terrible river--the
     last but one--and certainly the most determined conflict that we
     had endured.

     "The Bangala may be said to be the Ashantees of the Livingstone
     River, though their country has comparatively but a small populated
     river front. Their villages cover--at intervals of a mile or half a
     mile--a line of ten miles. They trade with Ikengo and Irebu down
     the river all the ivory they have purchased from Upoto, Gunji,
     Mpisa, UkerÃ©, Rubunga, Urangi, Mpakiwana, and Marunja. I observed
     soon after the fight began that many canoes emerged out of a river
     coming from a northerly direction. For a long period the river of
     Bangala has appeared on West African maps as the Bancaro River. The
     word Bangala, which may be pronounced Bangara, Bankara, or Bankaro,
     signifies the people of Mangala or Mangara, Mankara or Mankaro. I
     have simply adopted the more popular term.

     [Illustration: THE ATTACK OF THE SIXTY-THREE CANOES OF THE
     PIRATICAL BANGALA.]

     "We continued our journey on this eventful day until an hour after
     sunset, when we proceeded to establish a camp at the head of a
     narrow, tortuous channel, which lost itself amid the clusters of
     small islets.

     "On the 15th, at noon, we reached north latitude 0Â° 58' 0". The
     strong winds which at this season blow daily up river impeded our
     journey greatly. They generally began at 8 A.M., and lasted until 3
     P.M. When narrow channels were open to us we were enabled to
     proceed without interruption, but when exposed to broad open
     streams the waves rose as high as two feet, and were a source of
     considerable danger. Indeed, from the regularity and increased
     force of the winds, I half suspected at the time that the
     Livingstone emptied into some vast lake such as the Victoria
     Nyanza. The mean temperature in the shade seldom exceeded 74Â°
     Fahrenheit, and the climate, though not dry, was far more agreeable
     than the clammy humidity characteristic of the east coast. The
     difference between the heat in this elevated region and that of the
     east coast was such that, while it was dangerous to travel in the
     sun without a sun-umbrella, near the sea on the east coast a light
     double-cotton cloth cap saved me from feeling any inconvenience
     when standing up in the boat under a bright glaring sun and
     cloudless sky. While sitting down in the boat, a few minutes was
     sufficient to convince me it was dangerous, without an umbrella,
     even here. While at work at the Stanley Falls the umbrella was not
     used. The nights were uncomfortable without a blanket, and
     sometimes even two were desirable.

     [Illustration: POISONED ARROWS.]

     "The winds which prevail at this season of the year are from the
     southwest, or south, which means from the temperate latitude of the
     South Atlantic, and slightly chilled in their passage over the
     western ranges. In the early morning the thermometer was often as
     low as 64Â°. From 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. it ranged from 75Â° to 85Â°
     Fahrenheit in the shade; from 4 P.M. to sunset it ranged from 72Â°
     to 80Â°. From the 12th of January until the 5th of March we
     experienced no rain.

     "One remarkable fact connected with our life in this region is,
     that though we endured more anxiety of mind and more strain on the
     body, were subject to constant peril, and fared harder (being
     compelled for weeks to subsist on green bananas, cassava, and
     sugarless tea, and those frequently in scanty quantities),
     we--Frank and I--enjoyed better health on the Livingstone than at
     any other period of the journey; but whether this unusual health
     might not be attributed to having become more acclimatized is a
     question.

     "The mirage on the Livingstone was often ludicrously deceptive,
     playing on our fears at a most trying period, in a manner which
     plunged us from a temporary enjoyment of our immunity from attack
     into a state of suspicion and alarm, which probably, in nine cases
     out of ten, arose out of the exaggerated proportions given to a
     flock of pelicans or wild geese, which to our nerves, then in a
     high state of tension, appeared to be a very host of tall warriors.
     A young crocodile basking on a sandy spit appeared to be as large
     as a canoe, and an ancient and bleached tree a ship.

     [Illustration: A CROCODILE HUNT.]

     "At noon of the 17th we had reached north latitude 0Â° 18' 41", our
     course during the 16th and 17th having been southwest, but a
     little before sunset the immense river was gradually deflecting to
     south.

     "I quote the following from my note-book:

     "'_February_ 18, 1877.--For three days we have been permitted,
     through the mercy of God, to descend this great river uninterrupted
     by savage clamor or ferocity. Winds during two days seriously
     impeded us, and were a cause for anxiety, but yesterday was fine
     and calm, and the river like a sheet of burnished glass; we
     therefore made good progress. In the afternoon we encountered a
     native trading expedition from Ikengo in three canoes, one of which
     was manned by fifteen paddlers, clothed in robes of crimson
     blanket-cloth. We hailed them, but they refused to answer us. This
     sight makes me believe the river must be pretty free of cataracts,
     and it may be that there are no more than the Sundi cataract, and
     the Falls of Yellalla reported by Tuckey in 1816, otherwise I
     cannot account for the ascent of three trading vessels, and such
     extensive possession of cloths and guns, so far up the river.

     "'Since the 10th of February we have been unable to purchase food,
     or indeed approach a settlement for any amicable purpose. The
     aborigines have been so hostile that even fishing-canoes have fired
     at us as though we were harmless game. God alone knows how we shall
     prosper below. But let come what may, I have purposed to attempt
     communicating with the natives to-morrow. A violent death will be
     preferable to death by starvation.

     "'_February_ 19, 1877.--This morning we regarded each other as
     fated victims of protracted famine, or the rage of savages, like
     those of Mangala. But as we feared famine most, we resolved to
     confront the natives again. At 10 A.M., while we were descending
     the Livingstone along the left bank, we discovered an enormous
     river, considerably over a thousand yards wide, with a strong
     current, and deep, of the color of black tea. This is the largest
     influent yet discovered, and after joining the Livingstone it
     appeared to command the left half to itself--it strangely refuses
     to amalgamate with the Livingstone, and the divisional line between
     them is plainly marked by a zigzag ripple, as though the two great
     streams contended with one another for the mastery. Even the
     Aruwimi and the Lowwa united would not greatly exceed this giant
     influent. Its strong current and black water contrast very strongly
     with the whitey-brown Livingstone. On the upper side of the
     confluence is situate Ibonga, but the natives, though not openly
     hostile, replied to us with the peculiar war-cries "Yaha-ha-ha!"

     "'We continued our journey, though grievously hungry, past Bwena
     and Inguba, doing our utmost to induce the staring fishermen to
     communicate with us, without any success. They became at once
     officiously busy with guns, and dangerously active. We arrived at
     Ikengo, and as we were almost despairing we proceeded to a small
     island opposite this settlement and prepared to encamp. Soon a
     canoe with seven men came dashing across, and we prepared our
     moneys for exhibition. They unhesitatingly advanced, and ran their
     canoe alongside us. We were rapturously joyful, and returned them a
     most cordial welcome, as the act was a most auspicious sign of
     confidence. We were liberal, and the natives fearlessly accepted
     our presents, and from this giving of gifts we proceeded to seal
     this incipient friendship with our blood with all due ceremony.

     [Illustration: ELEPHANT HUNTERS ON THE CONGO.]

     "'After an hour's stay with us they returned to communicate with
     their countrymen, leaving one young fellow with us, which was
     another act of grace. Soon from a village below Ikengo two more
     canoes came up with two chiefs, who were extremely insolent and
     provoking, though after nearly two and a half years' experience of
     African manners we were not to be put out of temper because two
     drunken savages chose to be overbearing.

     [Illustration: AFRICAN KNIFE AND AXES.]

     "'By and by they cooled down. We got them to sit and talk, and we
     laughed together, and were apparently the best of friends. Of all
     the things which struck their fancy, my note-book, which they
     called "tara-tara," or looking-glass, appeared to them to be the
     most wonderful. They believed it possessed manifold virtues, and
     that it came from above. Would I, could I, sell it to them? It
     would have found a ready sale. But as it contained records of
     disaster by flood and fire, charts of rivers and creeks and
     islands, sketches of men and manners, notes upon a thousand
     objects, I could not part with it even for a tusk of ivory.

     "'They got angry and sulky again. It was like playing with and
     coaxing spoiled children. We amused them in various ways, and they
     finally became composed, and were conquered by good-nature. With a
     generous scorn of return gifts, they presented me with a gourdful
     of palm-wine. But I begged so earnestly for food that they sent
     their canoes back, and, while they sat down by my side, it devolved
     upon me until their return to fascinate and charm them with
     benignant gestures and broken talk. About 3 P.M. provisions came in
     basketfuls of cassava tubers, bananas, and long plantains, and the
     two chiefs made me rich by their liberality, while the people began
     also to thaw from that stupor into which impending famine had
     plunged them. At sunset our two friends, with whom I had labored
     with a zealot's enthusiasm, retired, each leaving with me a spear
     as a pledge that they would return to-morrow, and renew our
     friendly intercourse, with canoe-loads of provisions.

     [Illustration: SPEARS, AND SHIELD OF ELEPHANT-HIDE.]

     "'_February_ 20, 1877.--My two friends brought most liberal
     supplies with them of cassava tubers, cassava loaves, flour, maize,
     plantains, and bananas, and two small goats, besides two large
     gourdfuls of palm-wine, and, what was better, they had induced
     their countrymen to respond to the demand for food. We held a
     market on Mwangangala Island, at which there was no scarcity of
     supplies; black pigs, goats, sheep, bananas, plantains, cassava
     bread, flour, maize, sweet potatoes, yams, and fish being the
     principal things brought for sale.

     "'The tall chief of Bwena and the chief of Inguba, influenced by
     the two chiefs of Ikengo, also thawed, and announced their coming
     by sounding those curious double bell-gongs, and blowing long horns
     of ivory, the notes of which distance made quite harmonious. During
     the whole of this day life was most enjoyable, intercourse
     unreservedly friendly, and though most of the people were armed
     with guns there was no manifestation of the least desire to be
     uncivil, rude, or hostile, which inspired us once more with a
     feeling of security to which we had been strangers since leaving
     Urangi.

     "'From my friends I learned that the name of the great river above
     Bwena is called Ikelemba. When I asked them which was the largest
     river, that which flowed by Mangala, or that which came from the
     southeast, they replied, that though Ikelemba River was very large,
     it was not equal to the "big river." They said it would take me
     thirty days to reach the cataracts of the lower part of the river.

     "'Every weapon these natives possess is decorated with fine brass
     wire and brass tacks. Their knives are beautiful weapons, of a
     bill-hook pattern, the handles of which are also profusely
     decorated with an amount of brass-work and skill that places them
     very high among the clever tribes. These knives are carried in
     broad sheaths of red buffalo-hide, and are suspended by a belt of
     the same material. Besides an antique flint-lock musket, each
     warrior is armed with from four to five light and long assegais,
     with staves of the _Curtisia faginea_, and a bill-hook sword. They
     are a finely formed people, of a chocolate brown, very partial to
     camwood powder and palm-oil. Snuff is very freely taken, and their
     tobacco is most pungent.

     "'_February_ 21.--This afternoon at 2 P.M. we continued our
     journey. Eight canoes accompanied us some distance, and then parted
     from us, with many demonstrations of friendship. The river flows
     from Ikengo southwesterly, the flood of the Ikelemba retaining its
     dark color, and spreading over a breadth of three thousand yards;
     the Livingstone's pure, whitey-gray waters flow over a breadth of
     about five thousand yards, in many broad channels.'

     "From the left bank we crossed to the right, on the morning of the
     22d, and, clinging to the wooded shores of Ubangi, had reached at
     noon south latitude 0Â° 51' 13". Two hours later we came to where
     the great river contracted to a breadth of three thousand yards,
     flowing between two low, rocky points, both of which were populous,
     well cultivated, and rich with banana plantations. Below these
     points the river slowly widened again, and islands well wooded,
     like those farther up the river, rose into view, until by their
     number they formed once more intricate channels and winding creeks.

     [Illustration: SPECTATORS AMONG THE TREES.]

     "Desirous of testing the character of the natives, we pulled across
     to the left bank, until, meeting with a small party of fishermen,
     we were again driven by their ferocity to seek the untravelled and
     unpopulated island wildernesses. It was rather amusing than
     otherwise to observe the readiness of the savages of Irebu to
     fire their guns at us. They appeared to think that we were human
     waifs without parentage, guardianship, or means of protection, for
     their audacity was excessive. One canoe with only four men dashed
     down at us from behind an island close to the left bank, and fired
     point-blank from a distance of one hundred yards. Another party ran
     along a spit of sand and coolly waited our approach on their knees,
     and, though we sheered off to a distance of two hundred yards from
     them, they poured a harmless volley of slugs towards us, at which
     Baraka, the humorist, said that the pagans caused us to 'eat more
     iron than grain.'

     "Such frantic creatures, however, could not tempt us to fight them.
     The river was wide enough, channels innumerable afforded us means
     of escaping from their mad ferocity, and if poor purblind nature
     was so excessively arrogant, Providence had kindly supplied us with
     crooked by-ways and unfrequented paths of water which we might
     pursue unmolested.

     "At noon of the 23d we had reached 1Â° 22' 15" south latitude.
     Strong gales met us during each day. The islands were innumerable,
     creeks and channels winding in and out among the silent scenes. But
     though their general appearance was much the same, almost uniform
     in outline and size, the islands never became commonplace. Was it
     from gratitude at the security they afforded us from the ruthless
     people of these regions? I do not know, but every bosky island into
     whose dark depths, shadowed by impervious roofs of foliage, we
     gazed had about it something kindly and prepossessing. Did we love
     them because, from being hunted by our kind, and ostracized from
     communities of men, we had come to regard them as our homes? I
     cannot tell, but I shall ever and forever remember them. Ah, had I
     but space, how I would revel in descriptions of their treasures and
     their delights! Even with their gad-flies and their tsetsÃ©, their
     mosquitoes and their ants, I love them. There was no treachery or
     guile in their honest depths; the lurking assassin feared their
     twilight gloom; the savage dared not penetrate their shades without
     a feeling of horror; but to us they were refuges in our distress,
     and their solitudes healed our woes. How true the words,
     'Affliction cometh not out of the dust, nor doth trouble spring out
     of the ground.' Innocence and peace dwelt in the wilderness alone.
     Outside of these retreats glared the fierce-eyed savage, with
     malice and rage in his heart, and deadly weapons in his hand.

     "To us, then, these untenanted islets, with their 'breadths of
     tropic shade, and palms in clusters,' seemed verily 'knots of
     paradise.' Like hunted beasts of the chase, we sought the gloom and
     solitudes of the wilds. Along the meandering and embowered creeks,
     hugging the shadows of the o'erarching woods, we sought for that
     safety which man refused us.

     "The great river grew sealike in breadth below Irebu on the morning
     of the 24th; indeed, it might have been one hundred miles in
     breadth for aught we knew, deep-buried as we were among the
     islands. Yet there were broad and deep channels on every side of
     us, as well as narrow creeks between lengthy islands. The volume of
     water appeared exhaustless, though distributed over such an
     enormous width. There was water sufficient to float the most
     powerful steamers that float in the Mississippi. Here and there
     among the verdured isles gleamed broad humps of white sand, but on
     either side were streams several hundred yards wide, with as much
     as three fathoms' depth of water in the channels.

     "At noon we reached south latitude 1Â° 37' 22". The Mompurengi
     natives appeared on an island and expressed their feelings by
     discharging two guns at us, which we did not resent, but steadily
     held on our way. An hour afterwards faithful Amina, wife of
     KachÃ©chÃ©, breathed her last, making a most affecting end.

     "Being told by KachÃ©chÃ© that his poor wife was dying, I drew my
     boat alongside of the canoe she was lying in. She was quite
     sensible, but very weak. 'Ah, master,' she said, 'I shall never see
     the sea again. Your child Amina is dying. I have so wished to see
     the cocoanuts and the mangoes; but no; Amina is dying--dying in a
     pagan land. She will never see Zanzibar. The master has been good
     to his children, and Amina remembers it. It is a bad world, master,
     and you have lost your way in it. Good-bye, master; do not forget
     poor little Amina!'

     "While floating down we dressed Amina in her shroud, and laid her
     tenderly out, and at sunset consigned her body to the depths of the
     silent river.

     "The morning of the 25th saw us once again on the broad stream
     floating down. We got a view of the mainland to the right, and
     discovered it to be very low. We hurried away into the island
     creeks, and floated down among many reedy, grassy islets, the haunt
     of bold hippopotami, one of which made a rush at a canoe with open
     mouth, but contented himself fortunately with a paddle, which he
     crunched into splinters.

     "On the 26th the grassy islets became more frequent, inhabited by
     the flamingo, pelican, stork, whydahs, ibis, geese, ducks, etc. The
     salt-makers find a great source of wealth in the grasses, and the
     smoke of their fires floated over the country in clouds.

     "At 10 A.M. the Levy Hills rose into view about two miles beyond
     the river, on the left bank, which as we neared Kutumpuku
     approached the river, and formed a ridge. Instantly the sight of
     the approaching hills suggested cataracts, and the memories of the
     terrible struggles we had undergone in passing the Stanley Falls
     were then brought vividly to our mind. What should we do with our
     sadly weakened force, were we to experience the same horrible
     scenes again?

     "At noon I took an observation, and ascertained that we were in
     south latitude 2Â° 23' 14". Edging off towards the right bank, we
     came to a creek, which, from the immense number of those amphibious
     animals, I have called 'Hippopotamus Creek.' Grass-covered islets,
     innumerable to us as we passed by them, were on either side. When
     about half-way through this creek we encountered seven canoes,
     loaded with men, about to proceed to their fishing haunts. Our
     sudden meeting occasioned a panic among the natives, and as man had
     hitherto been a dreaded object, it occasioned us also not a little
     uneasiness. Fortunately, however, they retreated in haste, uttering
     their fearful 'Yaha-ha-has,' and we steadily pursued our way down
     river, and about 3 P.M. emerged in view of the united stream, four
     thousand yards wide, contracted by the steep cultivated slopes of
     Bolobo on the left, and by a beautiful high upland--which had
     gradually been lifting from the level plains--on the right bank.

     "For a moment, as we issued in view of the stream, with scores of
     native canoes passing backward and forward, either fishing or
     proceeding to the grassy islets to their fish-sheds and
     salt-making, we feared that we should have another conflict; but
     though they looked at us wonderingly, there was no demonstration of
     hostility. One man in a canoe, in answer to our question, replied
     that the bold heights two hundred feet above the river, which
     swarmed with villages, was Bolobo. Being so near the border of the
     savage lands above, we thought it safer to wait yet one more day
     before attempting further intercourse with them.

     "On the 27th, during the morning, we were still among islets and
     waving branches, but towards the afternoon the islets had
     disappeared, and we were in view of a magnificent breadth of four
     miles of clear water. On our left the cultivated uplands of Bolobo
     had become elevated into a line of wooded hills, and on our right
     the wall of the brown, grassy upland rose high and steep, broken
     against the sky-line into cones.

     "Gradually the shores contracted, until at 3 P.M. the right bank
     deflected to a southeast course, and finally shot out a long rocky
     point, which to us, accustomed to an enormous breadth of river,
     appeared as though it were the commencement of a cataract. We
     approached it with the utmost caution, but on arriving near it we
     discovered that the mirage had exaggerated its length and height,
     for between it and the left bank were at least two thousand five
     hundred yards of deep water.

     "The time had now come when we could no longer sneak among reedy
     islets, or wander in secret among wildernesses of water; we must
     once more confront man. The native, as we had ascertained opposite
     Bolobo, was not the destructive infuriate of Irebu or Mompurengi,
     or the frantic brute of Mangala and Marunja. He appeared to be
     toning down into the MAN, and to understand that others of his
     species inhabited this globe. At least, we hoped so. We wished to
     test the accuracy of this belief, and now eagerly searched for
     opportunities to exchange greetings, and to claim kindred with him.
     As we had industriously collected a copious vocabulary of African
     languages, we felt a certain confidence that we had been
     sufficiently initiated into the science of aboriginal language to
     be able to begin practising it.

     "Behind the rocky point were three natives fishing for minnows with
     hand-nets. We lay to on our oars and accosted them. They replied to
     us clearly and calmly. There was none of that fierce fluster and
     bluster and wild excitement that we had come to recognize as the
     preliminary symptoms of a conflict. The word _ndu_--brother--was
     more frequent. To our overtures of friendship there was a visible
     inclination of assent; there was a manifest desire to accept our
     conciliatory sentiments; for we received conciliatory responses.
     Who could doubt a pacific conclusion to the negotiations? Our tact
     and diplomacy had been educated in a rough school of adversity.
     Once the attention of the natives had been arrested, and their
     confidence obtained, we had never failed to come to a friendly
     understanding.

     [Illustration: ENCOUNTER WITH A HIPPOPOTAMUS.]

     "They showed us a camping-place at the base of the brown, grassy
     upland, in the midst of a thin grove of trees. They readily
     subscribed to all the requirements of friendship,
     blood-brotherhood, and an exchange of a few small gifts. Two of
     them then crossed the river to Chumbiri, whose green, wooded slopes
     and fields, and villages and landing-place, were visible, to tell
     the King of Chumbiri that peaceable strangers desired friendship
     with him. They appeared to have described us to him as most
     engaging people, and to have obtained his cordial co-operation and
     sympathy in a very short time, for soon three canoes appeared
     conveying about forty men, under three of his sons, who bore to us
     the royal spear, and several royal gifts, such as palm-wine, a
     goat, bananas, and a chicken for myself, and a hearty welcome
     from the old king, their father, with the addition of a promise
     that he would call himself the next day.

     [Illustration: A PRESENT FROM CHUMBIRI.]

     "About 9 A.M. of the 28th, the king of Chumbiri appeared with
     _Ã©clat_. Five canoes filled with musketeers escorted him.

     [Illustration: THE KING OF CHUMBIRI.]

     "Though the sketch below is an admirable likeness of him, it may be
     well also to append a verbal description. A small-eyed man of fifty
     years or thereabout, with a well-formed nose, but wide nostrils and
     thin lips, clean shaved--or rather clean-plucked--with a quiet yet
     sociable demeanor, ceremonious and mild-voiced, with the instincts
     of a greedy trader cropping out of him at all points, and cunning
     beyond measure. The type of his curious hat may be seen on the head
     of any Armenian priest. It was formed out of close-plaited
     hyphene-palm fibre, sufficiently durable to outlast his life though
     he might live a century. From his left shoulder, across his chest,
     was suspended the sword of the bill-hook pattern, already described
     in the passages about Ikengo. Above his shoulder stood upright the
     bristles of an elephant's tail. His hand was armed with a buffalo's
     tail, made into a fly-flapper, to whisk mosquitoes and gnats off
     the royal face. To his wrist were attached the odds and ends which
     the laws of superstition had enjoined upon him, such as
     charm-gourds, charm-powders in bits of red and black flannel, and a
     collection of wooden antiquities, besides a snuff-gourd and a
     parcel of tobacco-leaves.

     [Illustration: GREAT PIPE OF KING OF CHUMBIRI.]

     "The king's people were apparently very loyal and devoted to him,
     and his sons showed remarkable submissiveness. The little
     snuff-gourd was in constant requisition, and he took immoderate
     quantities, inhaling a quarter of a teaspoonful at a time from the
     palm of his hand, to which he pressed his poor nose until it seemed
     to be forced into his forehead. Immediately after, one of his
     filially affectionate children would fill his long chibouque, which
     was six feet in length, decorated with brass tacks and tassels of
     braided cloth. The bowl was of iron, and large enough to contain
     half an ounce of tobacco. He would then take two or three
     long-drawn whiffs, until his cheeks were distended like two
     hemispheres, and fumigate his charms thoroughly with the smoke. His
     sons then relieved him of the pipe--at which he snapped his
     fingers--and distended their cheeks into hemispherical
     protuberances in like manner, and also in the same way fumigated
     their little charms; and so the chibouque of peace and sociability
     went the round of the circle, as though it were a council of Sioux
     about to hold a pow-wow, and as the pipe passed round there was an
     interchange of finger-snaps in a decorous, grave, and ceremonious
     style.

     "Our intercourse with the king was very friendly, and it was
     apparent that we were mutually pleased. The only fault that I, as a
     stranger, could find in him was an excessive cunning, which
     approached to the sublime. He had evidently cultivated fraud and
     duplicity as an art, yet he was suave and wheedling. Could I
     complain? Never were people so willing to be victimized. Had we
     been warned that he would victimize us, I do not think that we
     should have refused his friendship.

     "An invitation was extended to us to make his own village our home.
     We were hungry; and no doubt we were approaching cataracts. It
     would be welcome knowledge to know what to expect below in that
     broad defile filled by the great river; what peoples, countries,
     tribes, villages, rivers we should see; if the tribes were amenable
     to reason in the unknown country; if white men had ever been heard
     of; if there were cataracts below, and if they were passable. We
     accepted the invitation, and crossed the river, drums and double
     bell-gongs sounding the peaceful advance of our flotilla upon
     Chumbiri.

     "We were proud of our reception by the dames of Chumbiri. Loyal and
     submissive to their king, they exhibited kindly attentions to the
     strangers. We held a grand market, and won the natives' hearts by
     our liberality. Back rations for several days were due to our
     people, and, filled with an extravagant delight--even as Frank and
     I were--they expended their ration moneys with a recklessness of
     consequences which only the novelty of the situation explained. We
     had arrived at port, and weather-beaten voyagers are generally free
     with their moneys upon such occasions.

     [Illustration: ONE OF THE KING'S WIVES AT CHUMBIRI.]

     "The dames of Chumbiri were worth seeing, even to us, who were
     sated with the thousand curious things we had met in our long
     travels. They were also pretty, of a rich brown color many of them,
     large-eyed, and finely formed, with a graceful curve of shoulder I
     had not often observed. But they were slaves of fashion. Six tenths
     of the females wore brass collars two inches in diameter; three
     tenths had them two and a half inches in diameter; one tenth were
     oppressed with collars three inches in diameter; which completely
     covered the neck, and nearly reached the shoulder ends. Fancy the
     weight of thirty pounds of brass, soldered permanently round the
     neck! Yet these oppressed women were the favorite wives of
     Chumbiri! And they rejoiced in their oppression!

     "I believe that Chumbiri--who, as I said, was a keen and
     enterprising trader, the first aboriginal African that might be
     compared to a Parsee--as soon as he obtained any brass wire, melted
     it and forged it into brass collars for his wives. That the collars
     were not larger may be attributed, perhaps, to his poverty. He
     boasted to me he possessed 'four tens' of wives, and each wife was
     collared permanently in thick brass. I made a rough calculation,
     and I estimated that his wives bore about their necks until death
     at least eight hundred pounds of brass; his daughters--he had
     six--one hundred and twenty pounds; his favorite female slaves
     about two hundred pounds. Add six pounds of brass wire to each wife
     and daughter for arm and leg ornaments, and one is astonished to
     discover that Chumbiri possesses a portable store of one thousand
     three hundred and ninety-six pounds of brass.

     "I asked of Chumbiri what he did with the brass on the neck of a
     dead wife. Chumbiri smiled. Cunning rogue; he regarded me
     benevolently, as though he loved me for the searching question.
     Significantly he drew his finger across his throat.

     "The warriors and young men are distinguished for a characteristic
     style of hair-dressing, which belongs to Uyanzi alone. It is
     arranged into four separate plaits, two of which overhang the
     forehead like lovers' curls. Another special mark of Uyanzi are two
     tattooed lines over the forehead. In whatever part of the lower
     Livingstone these peculiarities of style may be seen, they are
     indubitably Wy-yanzi, or natives of Uyanzi.

     "The country of Uyanzi embraces many small districts, and extends
     along the left bank of the great river, from Bolobo, in south
     latitude 2Â° 23' 14", to the confluence of the Ibari Nkutu, or river
     of Nkutu, and the Livingstone, in 3Â° 14' south latitude. The
     principal districts are Bolobo, Isangu, Chumbiri, Musevoka,
     Misongo, and Ibaka. Opposite is the country of the BatekÃ©, a wilder
     tribe than the Wy-yanzi, some of the more eastern of whom are
     professed cannibals. To the north is the cannibal tribe of the
     Wanfuninga, of ferocious repute, and dreaded by the Wy-yanzi and
     BatekÃ©.

     "On the 7th of March we parted from the friendly king of Chumbiri,
     with an escort of forty-five men, in three canoes, under the
     leadership of his eldest son, who was instructed by his father to
     accompany us as far as the pool, now called Stanley Pool, because
     of an incident which will be described hereafter.

     "For some reason we crossed the river, and camped on the right
     bank, two miles below Chumbiri. At midnight the Wy-yanzi awoke us
     all by the fervor with which they employed their fetishes to guide
     us safely from camp to camp, which they named. As they had been
     very successful in charming away the rain with which we had been
     threatened the evening before, our people were delighted to hear
     them pray for success, having implicit faith in them."

     [Illustration: A BOWMAN.]




CHAPTER XIV.

TREACHERY OF THE KING'S SONS.--THE GREATEST RASCAL OF AFRICA.--A PYTHON
IN CAMP.--STANLEY POOL.--DOVER CLIFFS.--MANKONEH.--FIRST SOUND OF THE
FALLS.--BARGAINING FOR FOOD.--LOSS OF THE BIG GOAT.--EXCHANGING
CHARMS.--FALL OF THE CONGO FROM NYANGWÃ‰ TO STANLEY POOL.--GOING AROUND
THE GREAT FALL.--DRAGGING THE BOATS OVERLAND.--GORDON-BENNET
RIVER.--"THE CALDRON."--LOSS OF THE _LONDON TOWN_.--POOR KALULU.--HIS
DEATH IN THE RIVER.--LOSS OF MEN BY DROWNING.--SAD SCENES IN CAMP.


"The sons of the King of Chumbiri," said Frank, "proved treacherous.
Soon after starting they lagged behind, and the explorers continued
without them. Nothing of importance occurred during the day, and the
camp was made for the night in a dense forest near the bank of the
river. Hardly had the explorers landed before loud shrieks were heard
from a boy who narrowly escaped being eaten by a python. Half an hour
later the same python, or another, was found in another part of the camp
trying to throw his folds about one of the women. There was great
excitement, and the snake was promptly killed. He measured thirteen feet
six inches in length, and was fifteen inches around the thickest part of
the body.

[Illustration: SON OF THE KING OF CHUMBIRI.]

"The next morning, just as they were preparing breakfast, they were
attacked by a party of savages who opened fire upon them with muskets.
Fourteen of Mr. Stanley's men were wounded before the assailants were
put to flight; when the expedition continued on its journey it was found
that their camping-place had been about two miles above the village to
which their assailants belonged. All the warriors of the village came
out to the bank of the river with their muskets and spears, but the
travellers kept at a safe distance and were not harmed. The sons of the
king came up with them shortly afterwards, but made such extraordinary
demands for escorting the party to the falls that the explorer concluded
to go along without them. He gives it as his opinion that this
oily-tongued king is the greatest rascal in all Africa.

[Illustration: A PYTHON IN AN AFRICAN FOREST.]

"And now," said Frank, "I will read to you about the approach to the
famous falls of the lower Congo.

     "About 11 A.M. of the 12th the river gradually expanded from
     fourteen hundred to twenty-five hundred yards, which admitted us in
     view of a mighty breadth of river, which the men at once, with
     happy appropriateness, termed 'a pool.' Sandy islands rose in front
     of us like a sea-beach, and on the right towered a long row of
     cliffs, white and glistening, so like the cliffs of Dover that
     Frank at once exclaimed that it was a bit of England. The grassy
     table-land above the cliffs appeared as green as a lawn, and so
     much reminded Frank of Kentish Downs that he exclaimed
     enthusiastically, 'I feel we are nearing home.'

     "While I was taking an observation at noon of the position, Frank,
     with my glass in his hand, ascended the highest part of the large
     sandy dune that had been deposited by the mighty river, and took a
     survey of its strange and sudden expansion, and after he came back
     he said, 'Why, I declare, sir, this place is just like a pool; as
     broad as it is long. There are mountains all round it, and it
     appears to me almost circular.'[10]

     [10] "Frank described the crater of an extinct volcano, which is
     six miles in length and four miles wide, as set forth more in
     detail subsequently."

     "'Well, if it is a pool, we must distinguish it by some name. Give
     me a suitable name for it, Frank.'

     "'Why not call it "Stanley Pool," and these cliffs Dover Cliffs?
     For no traveller who may come here again will fail to recognize the
     cliffs by that name.'

     [Illustration: THE NORTHERN END OF STANLEY POOL.]

     "Subsequent events brought these words vividly to my recollection,
     and in accordance with Frank's suggestion I have named this
     lakelike expansion of the river from Dover Cliffs to the first
     cataract of the Livingstone Falls--embracing about thirty square
     miles--the Stanley Pool. The latitude of the entrance from above to
     the pool was ascertained to be 4Â° 3' south.

     "The left shore is occupied by the populous settlements of Nshasa,
     Nkunda, and Ntamo. The right is inhabited by the wild BatekÃ©, who
     are generally accused of being cannibals.

     [Illustration: MAP OF STANLEY POOL.]

     "Soon after we began our descent of the pool, skirting the right
     shore, we observed a chalky mount, near which were two or three
     columns of the same material. From a cove just below emerged two or
     three BatekÃ© canoes, the crews of which, after collecting their
     faculties, consented to show us the cataract, the noise of which,
     as they attempted to describe it, elicited roars of laughter from
     the members of the expedition. This outburst of loud merriment
     conquered all reluctance on the part of the BatekÃ© to accompany us.

     "After winding in and out of many creeks which were very shallow,
     we approached the village of Mankoneh, the chief of the BatekÃ©. His
     people during the daytime are generally scattered over these sandy
     dunes of the Stanley Pool attending to their nets and fish-snares,
     and to protect themselves from the hot sun always take with them
     several large mats to form sheds. Mankoneh, to our great delight,
     was a bluff, hearty, genial soul, who expressed unbounded pleasure
     at seeing us; he also volunteered to guide us to the falls. He was
     curious to know how we proposed travelling after arriving near
     them, for it was impossible, he said, to descend the falls. By a
     ludicrous pantomime he led us to understand that they were
     something very fearful.

     "A few hundred yards below his village the pool sharply contracted,
     and the shore of Ntamo--a projecting point from the crescent-shaped
     ridge beyond--appeared at a distance of two thousand yards. It was
     then that we heard for the first time the low and sullen thunder of
     the first cataract of the Livingstone Falls.

     "Slowly Mankoneh, in his canoe, glided down towards it, and louder
     it grew on the ears, until when within one hundred yards of the
     first line of broken water, he pointed forward and warned us not to
     proceed farther. We made for the shore, and found ourselves on a
     narrow, ledgelike terrace bristling with great blocks of granite,
     amid a jungly tangle, which grew at the base of high hills. Here,
     after a short busy period with axe and machete, we constructed a
     rude camp. The only level spot was not six feet square.

     "Mankoneh, the BatekÃ© chief, pointed out to us the village of Itsi,
     the chief of Ntamo, which is situated on the left bank, in a line
     with the beginning of the first cataract, and spoke of Itsi with
     great respect, as though he were very powerful.

     "About 5 P.M. a small canoe was observed to cross over to our side
     from the left bank, a mile above the falls. The canoe-men, through
     the representations of our hearty friend Mankoneh, were soon
     induced to land in our camp to converse with the white men, and
     before long we had succeeded in making them feel quite at home with
     us. As they were in a quiver of anxious desire to impart to the
     chief Itsi all the wonderful things they had witnessed with us,
     they departed about sunset, solemnly promising we should see the
     famous Itsi of Ntamo next morning.

     "Lashing our canoes firmly lest an accident should happen during
     the night, we turned to our rude huts to sleep in peace. We were
     all very hungry, as we had been able to purchase nothing from the
     natives since leaving Chumbiri five days before, and we had been
     more than usually improvident, having placed far too much reliance
     on the representations so profusely made to us by the mild-voiced
     but cunning king of Chumbiri. From very shame I refrain from
     publishing the stores of goods with which I purchased the glib
     promises of assistance from Chumbiri, not one of which was
     realized.

     [Illustration: ONE OF THE KING'S WARRIORS.]

     "Morning of the 13th of March found us, from the early hours of
     dawn, anxiously waiting the arrival of Itsi of Ntamo and the
     reappearance of Mankoneh. From our camp we might easily with a
     glass note any movement on the other bank. At 9 A.M.--Itsi
     evidently was not an early riser--a large canoe and two consorts,
     laden with men, were seen propelled up stream along the left bank,
     and, a mile above the landing-place, to cross the river at a
     furious pace. The rows of upright figures, with long paddles,
     bending their bodies forward in unison, and their voices rising in
     a swelling chorus to the sound of the steady beat of a large drum,
     formed a pretty and inspiring sight. Arriving at the right bank,
     with a perfect recklessness of the vicinity of the falls, they
     dashed down towards our camp at the rate of six knots an hour. The
     large war-canoe, though not quite equal to the monster of the
     Aruwimi in size, was a noble vessel, and Itsi, who was seated in
     state 'midship,' with several gray-headed elders near him, was
     conscious, when he saw our admiration, that he had created a
     favorable impression. She measured eighty-five feet seven inches in
     length, four feet in width, and was three feet three inches deep.
     Her crew consisted of sixty paddlers and four steersmen, and she
     carried twenty-two passengers, close-packed, besides, making a
     total of eighty-six persons. The other two canoes carried
     ninety-two persons altogether.

     "We cordially invited Itsi and his people to our camp, to which
     they willingly responded. Some grass, fresh cut, in anticipation of
     the visit of our honorable friends, had been strewn over a cleared
     space close to the stream, and our best mats spread over it.

     [Illustration: AFRICAN RECLINING-CHAIR.]

     "There were four or five gray-headed elders present, one of whom
     was introduced as Itsi. He laughed heartily, and it was not long
     before we were on a familiar footing. They then broached the
     subject of blood-brotherhood. We were willing, but they wished to
     defer the ceremony until they had first shown their friendly
     feelings to us. Accordingly the old man handed over to me ten
     loaves of cassava bread, or cassava pudding, fifty tubers of
     cassava, three bunches of bananas, a dozen sweet potatoes, some
     sugar-cane, three fowls, and a diminutive goat. A young man of
     about twenty-six years made Frank's acquaintance by presenting to
     him double the quantity I received. This liberality drew my
     attention to him. His face was dotted with round spots of
     soot-and-oil mixture. From his shoulders depended a long cloth of
     check pattern, while over one shoulder was a belt, to which was
     attached a queer medley of small gourds containing snuff and
     various charms, which he called his Inkisi. In return for the
     bounteous store of provisions given to Frank and myself, as they
     were cotton or grass-cloth-wearing people, we made up a bundle of
     cloths for each of the principals, which they refused, to our
     surprise. We then begged to know what they desired, that we might
     show our appreciation of their kindness, and seal the bond of
     brotherhood with our blood.

     "The young man now declared himself to be Itsi, the King of Ntamo;
     the elder, who had previously been passed off for the king, being
     only an ancient councillor. It was a surprise, but not an
     unpleasant one, though there was nothing very regal or majestic
     about him, unless one may so call his munificent bounty to Frank as
     compared to the old man's to me. We finally prevailed upon Itsi to
     inform us what gift would be pleasing to him.

     "He said, 'I want only that big goat; if you give me that, I shall
     want nothing more.'

     [Illustration: A PRESENT FROM ITSI.]

     "The 'big goat' which he so earnestly required was the last of six
     couples I had purchased in Uregga for the purpose of presentation
     to an eminent English lady, in accordance with a promise I had made
     to her four years previously. All the others had perished from heat
     apoplexy, sickness, and want of proper care, which the terrible
     life we had led had prevented us from supplying. This 'big goat'
     and a lionlike ram, gigantic specimens of the domestic animals of
     Manyema and Uregga, were all that survived. They had both become
     quite attached to us, and were valued companions of a most eventful
     journey of eleven hundred miles. I refused it, but offered to
     double the cloths. Whereupon Itsi sulked, and prepared to depart;
     not, however, before hinting that we should find it difficult to
     obtain food if he vetoed the sale of provisions. We coaxed him back
     again to his seat, and offered him one of the asses. The possession
     of such a 'gigantic' animal as an ass, which was to him of all
     domestic animals a veritable Titanosaurus, was a great temptation;
     but the shuddering women, who feared being eaten by it, caused him
     to decline the honor of the gift. He now offered three goats for
     what appeared to him to be the 'largest' goat in Africa, and
     boasted of his goodness, and how his friendship would be
     serviceable to me; whereas, if he parted in anger, why, we should
     be entirely at his mercy. The goat was therefore transferred to his
     canoe, and Itsi departed for Ntamo, as though he were in possession
     of a new wonder.

     "Our provisions were only sufficient to prove what appetites we
     possessed, and not to assuage them; all were consumed in a few
     minutes, and we were left with only hopes of obtaining a little
     more on the next day.

     "On the 14th Itsi appeared with his war-canoe at 9 A.M., bringing
     three goats and twenty loaves of cassava bread and a few tubers,
     and an hour afterwards Nchuvira, King of Nkunda, Mankoneh, chief of
     the BatekÃ© fishermen near the Stanley Pool, and the King of Nshasa,
     at the southeast end of the Stanley Pool, arrived at our camp with
     several canoe crews. Each of the petty sovereigns of the districts
     in our neighborhood contributed a little, but altogether we were
     only able to distribute to each person two pounds of eatable
     provisions. Every chief was eager for a present, with which he was
     gratified, and solemn covenants of peace were entered into between
     the whites and the blacks. The treaty with Itsi was exceedingly
     ceremonious, and involved the exchange of charms. Itsi transferred
     to me, for my protection through life, a small gourdful of a
     curious powder, which had rather a saline taste, and I delivered
     over to him, as the white man's charm against all evil, a
     half-ounce vial of magnesia; further, a small scratch in Frank's
     arm, and another in Itsi's arm, supplied blood sufficient to unite
     us in one and indivisible bond of fraternity. After this we were
     left alone.

     "An observation by boiling-point, above the first cataract of
     Livingstone Falls, disclosed to us an altitude of 1147 feet above
     the ocean. At NyangwÃ© the river was 2077 feet. In twelve hundred
     and thirty-five miles, therefore, there had been only a reduction
     of 930 feet, divided as follows:

                                                   Distance
                                            Feet.  in miles. Fall per mile.

  NyangÃ©                                     2077 }
  Four miles below seventh cataract,              }
        Stanley Falls                        1511 }
                                             ---- }    337     20 inches.
                                        Feet, 566 }

  Four miles below seventh cataract,
        Stanley Falls                        1511 }
  River at Ntamo, above first cataract,           }
        Livingstone Falls                    1147 }    898      5 inches,
                                             ---- }   River       nearly.
                                        Feet, 364 } uninterrupted."

Frank paused a few moments, and, at the request of one of his auditors,
repeated the figures he had just given. Then he continued the narrative
as follows:

     "The wide wild land which, by means of the greatest river of
     Africa, we have pierced, is now about to be presented in a milder
     aspect than that which has filled the preceding pages with records
     of desperate conflicts and furious onslaughts of savage men. The
     people no longer resist our advance. Trade has tamed their natural
     ferocity, until they no longer resent our approach with the fury of
     beasts of prey.

     [Illustration: FLOATING ISLAND IN STANLEY POOL.]

     "It is the dread river itself of which we shall have now to
     complain. It is no longer the stately stream, whose mystic beauty,
     noble grandeur, and gentle, uninterrupted flow along a course of
     nearly nine hundred miles ever fascinated us, despite the savagery
     of its peopled shores, but a furious river, rushing down a steep
     bed obstructed by reefs of lava, projected barriers of rock, lines
     of immense boulders, winding in crooked course through deep chasms,
     and dropping down over terraces in a long series of falls,
     cataracts, and rapids. Our frequent contests with the savages
     culminated in tragic struggles with the mighty river as it rushed
     and roared through the deep, yawning pass that leads from the broad
     table-land down to the Atlantic Ocean.

     "Those voiceless and lone streams meandering between the thousand
     isles of the Livingstone; those calm and silent wildernesses of
     water over which we had poured our griefs and wailed in our sorrow;
     those woody solitudes where nightly we had sought to soothe our
     fevered brows, into whose depths we breathed our vows; that sealike
     amplitude of water which had proved our refuge in distress, weird
     in its stillness, and solemn in its mystery, are now exchanged for
     the cliff-lined gorge, through which with inconceivable fury the
     Livingstone sweeps with foaming billows into the broad Congo,
     which, at a distance of only one hundred and fifty-five
     geographical miles, is nearly eleven hundred feet below the summit
     of the first fall.

     [Illustration: VILLAGE IN THE VALLEY OF THE CONGO.]

     "On the 16th of March, having explored as far as the Gordon-Bennett
     River, and obtained a clear idea of our situation during the 15th,
     we began our labors with energy. Goods, asses, women, and children,
     with the guard under Frank, first moved overland to a temporary
     halting-place near the confluence. Then, manning the boat, I led
     the canoe-men from point to point along the right bank, over the
     first rapids. We had some skilful work to perform to avoid being
     swept away by the velocity of the current; but whenever we came to
     rocks we held the rattan hawsers in our hands, and, allowing the
     stream to take them beyond these dangerous points, brought them
     into the sheltered lee. Had a hawser parted nothing could have
     saved the canoe or the men in it, for at the confluence of the
     Gordon-Bennett with the great river the entire river leaps headlong
     into an abysm of waves and foam. Arriving in the Gordon-Bennett,
     we transported the expedition across, and then our labors ended at
     5 P.M. for the day.

     [Illustration: NATIVE POTTERY.]

     "Itsi of Ntamo had informed us there were only three cataracts,
     which he called the 'Child,' the 'Mother,' and the 'Father.' The
     'Child' was a two hundred yards' stretch of broken water; and the
     'Mother,' consisting of half a mile of dangerous rapids, we had
     succeeded in passing, and had pushed beyond it by crossing the
     upper branch of the Gordon-Bennett, which was an impetuous stream,
     seventy-five yards wide, with big cataracts of its own higher up.
     But the 'Father' is the wildest stretch of river that I have ever
     seen. Take a strip of sea blown over by a hurricane, four miles in
     length and half a mile in breadth, and a pretty accurate conception
     of its leaping waves may be obtained. Some of the troughs were one
     hundred yards in length, and from one to the other the mad river
     plunged. There was first a rush down into the bottom of an immense
     trough, and then, by its sheer force, the enormous volume would
     lift itself upward steeply until, gathering itself into a ridge, it
     suddenly hurled itself twenty or thirty feet straight upward,
     before rolling down into another trough. If I looked up or down
     along this angry scene, every interval of fifty or one hundred
     yards of it was marked by wave-towers--their collapse into foam and
     spray, the mad clash of watery hills, bounding mounds, and heaving
     billows, while the base of either bank, consisting of a long line
     of piled boulders of massive size, was buried in the tempestuous
     surf. The roar was tremendous and deafening. I can only compare it
     to the thunder of an express train through a rock tunnel. To speak
     to my neighbor, I had to bawl in his ear.

     "The most powerful ocean steamer, going at full speed on this
     portion of the river, would be as helpless as a cockle-boat. I
     attempted three times, by watching some tree floated down from
     above, to ascertain the rate of the wild current by observing the
     time it occupied in passing between two given points, from which I
     estimate it to be about thirty miles an hour!

     [Illustration: VIEW OF THE RIGHT BRANCH, FIRST CATARACT, OF THE
     LIVINGSTONE FALLS, FROM FOUR MILES BELOW JUMBA ISLAND.]

     "On the 17th, after cutting brushwood and laying it over a path of
     eight hundred yards in length, we crossed from the upper branch of
     the Gordon-Bennett to the lower branch, which was of equal breadth,
     but twenty feet below it. This enabled us the next day to float
     down to the confluence of the lower branch with the Livingstone.
     We could do no more on this day; the people were fainting from lack
     of food.

     "On the 18th, through the good-will of Mankoneh, the chief of the
     BatekÃ©, we were enabled to trade with the aborigines, a wild and
     degraded tribe, subsisting principally on fish and cassava. A goat
     was not to be obtained at any price, and for a chicken they
     demanded a gun! Cassava, however, was abundant.

     "From the confluence we formed another brush-covered road, and
     hauled the canoes over another eight hundred yards into a creek,
     which enabled us to reach, on the 20th, a wide sand-bar that
     blocked its passage into the great river. The sand-bar, in its
     turn, enabled us to reach the now moderated stream, below the
     influence of the roaring 'Father,' and to proceed by towing and
     punting half a mile below to an inlet in the rocky shore.

     "Gampa, the young chief of this district, became very friendly, and
     visited us each day with small gifts of cassava bread, a few
     bananas, and a small gourd of palm-wine.

     "On the 21st and the two days following we were engaged in hauling
     our vessels overland, a distance of three quarters of a mile, over
     a broad rocky point, into a baylike formation. Gampa and his people
     nerved us to prosecute our labors by declaring that there was only
     one small cataract below. Full of hope, we halted on the 24th to
     rest the wearied people, and in the meantime to trade for food.

     [Illustration: OVER ROCKY POINT CLOSE TO GAMPA'S.]

     "The 25th saw us at work at dawn in a bad piece of river, which is
     significantly styled the 'Caldron.' Our best canoe, seventy-five
     feet long, three feet wide, by twenty-one inches deep, the famous
     _London Town_, commanded by Manwa Sera, was torn from the hands of
     fifty men, and swept away in the early morning down to destruction.
     In the afternoon, the _Glasgow_, parting her cables, was swept
     away, drawn nearly into mid-river, returned up river half a mile,
     again drawn into the depths, ejected into a bay near where Frank
     was camped, and, to our great joy, finally recovered. Accidents
     were numerous; the glazed trap-rocks, washed by the ever-rising
     tidal-like waves, were very slippery, occasioning dangerous falls
     to the men. One man dislocated his shoulder, another was bruised on
     the hips, and another had a severe contusion of the head. Too
     careless of my safety in my eagerness and anxiety, I fell down,
     feet first, into a chasm thirty feet deep between two enormous
     boulders, but fortunately escaped with only a few rib bruises,
     though for a short time I was half stunned.

     [Illustration: AT WORK PASSING THE LOWER END OF THE FIRST CATARACT
     OF THE LIVINGSTONE FALLS, NEAR ROCKY ISLAND.]

     "On the 27th we happily succeeded in passing the fearful Caldron,
     but during our last efforts the _Crocodile_, eighty-five feet three
     inches long, was swept away into the centre of the Caldron, heaved
     upward, whirled round with quick gyrations, and finally shot into
     the bay north of Rocky Island, where it was at last secured. The
     next day we dropped down stream, and reached the western end of the
     bay above Rocky Island Falls.

     "Leaving Frank Pocock as usual in charge of the camp and goods, I
     mustered ninety men--most of the others being stiff from wounds
     received in the fight at Mwana Ibaka and other places--and
     proceeded, by making a wooden tramway with sleepers and rollers, to
     pass Rocky Island Falls. Mpwapwa and Shumari, of the boat's crew,
     were sent to explore, meanwhile, for another inlet or recess in the
     right bank. By 2 P.M. we were below the falls, and my two young men
     had returned, reporting that a mile or so below there was a fine
     camp, with a broad strip of sand lining a bay. This animated us to
     improve the afternoon hours by attemtping to reach it. The
     seventeen canoes now left to us were manned according to their
     capacity. As I was about to embark in my boat to lead the way, I
     turned to the people to give my last instructions--which were, to
     follow me, clinging to the right bank, and by no means to venture
     into mid-river into the current. While delivering my instructions,
     I observed Kalulu in the _Crocodile_, which was made out of the
     _Bassia Parkii_ tree, a hard, heavy wood, but admirable for canoes.
     When I asked him what he wanted in the canoe, he replied, with a
     deprecating smile and an expostulating tone, 'I can pull, sir;
     see!' 'Ah, very well,' I answered.

     "The boat-boys took their seats, and, skirting closely the cliffy
     shore, we rowed down stream, while I stood in the bow of the boat,
     guiding the coxswain, Uledi, with my hand. The river was not more
     than four hundred and fifty yards wide; but one cast of the
     sounding-lead close to the bank obtained a depth of one hundred and
     thirty-eight feet. The river was rapid, with certainly a seven-knot
     current, with a smooth, greasy surface, now and then an eddy, a
     gurgle, and gentle heave, but not dangerous to people in possession
     of their wits. In a very few moments we had descended the mile
     stretch, and before us, six hundred yards off, roared the furious
     falls since distinguished by the name 'Kalulu.'

     [Illustration: AFRICAN PIPES.]

     "With a little effort we succeeded in rounding the point and
     entering the bay above the falls, and reaching a pretty
     camping-place on a sandy beach. The first, second, and third canoes
     arrived soon after me, and I was beginning to congratulate myself
     on having completed a good day's work, when to my horror I saw the
     _Crocodile_ in mid-river far below the point which we had rounded,
     gliding with the speed of an arrow towards the falls over the
     treacherous calm water. Human strength availed nothing now, and we
     watched in agony, for I had three favorites in her--Kalulu,
     Mauredi, and Ferajji; and of the others, two, Rehani Makua and Wadi
     Jumah, were also very good men. It soon reached the island which
     cleft the falls, and was swept down the left branch. We saw it
     whirled round three or four times, then plunged down into the
     depths, out of which the stern presently emerged pointed upward,
     and we knew then that Kalulu and his canoe-mates were no more.

     [Illustration: DEATH OF KALULU.]

     "Fast upon this terrible catastrophe, before we could begin to
     bewail their loss, another canoe with two men in it darted past the
     point, borne by irresistibly on the placid but swift current to
     apparent, nay, almost certain destruction. I despatched my boat's
     crew up along the cliffs to warn the forgetful people that in
     mid-stream was certain death, and shouted out commands for the two
     men to strike for the left shore. The steersman by a strange chance
     shot his canoe over the falls, and, dexterously edging it towards
     the left shore a mile below, he and his companion contrived to
     spring ashore and were saved. As we observed them clamber over the
     rocks to approach a point opposite us, and finally sit down
     regarding us in silence across the river, our pity and love gushed
     strong towards them, but we could utter nothing of it. The roar of
     the falls completely mocked and overpowered the feeble human voice.

     "Before the boat's crew could well reach the descending canoes, the
     boulders being very large and offering great obstacles to rapid
     progress, a third canoe--but a small and light one--with only one
     man, the brave lad Soudi, who escaped from the spears of the
     Wanyaturu assassins in 1875, darted by, and cried out, as he
     perceived himself to be drifting helplessly towards the falls, 'La
     il Allah, il Allah'--There is but one God--'I am lost! Master!' He
     was then seen to address himself to what fate had in store for him.
     We watched him for a few moments, and then saw him drop. Out of the
     shadow of the fall he presently emerged, dropping from terrace to
     terrace, precipitated down, then whirled round, caught by great
     heavy waves, which whisked him to right and left and struck madly
     at him, and yet his canoe did not sink, but he and it were swept
     behind the lower end of the island, and then darkness fell upon the
     day of horror. Nine men lost in one afternoon!

     "This last accident, I was told, was caused by the faithlessness of
     the crew. One man, utterly unnerved by his fear of the river, ran
     away and hid in the bushes; the two others lost their hold of the
     tow-ropes, and thus their comrade was carried into the swift
     centre."

Frank stopped at this incident, and said he would resume the story in
the evening. His audience had listened with breathless interest to the
sad story of the death of Kalulu and his companions, and when the party
assembled for the evening session, all were eager to hear the
continuation of the account of Stanley's perilous descent of the Congo.

[Illustration: ONE OF GAMPA'S MEN.]




CHAPTER XV.

THE FRIENDLY BATEKÃ‰.--GREAT SNAKES.--SOUDI'S STRANGE
ADVENTURES.--CAPTURED BY HOSTILE NATIVES.--DESCENDING RAPIDS AND
FALLS.--LOSS OF A CANOE.--"WHIRLPOOL RAPIDS."--THE _LADY ALICE_ IN
PERIL.--GAVUBU'S COVE.--"LADY ALICE" RAPIDS.--A PERILOUS DESCENT.--ALARM
OF STANLEY'S PEOPLE.--TRIBUTARY STREAMS.--PANIC AMONG THE
CANOE-MEN.--NATIVE VILLAGES.--INKISI FALLS.--TUCKEY'S CATARACT.--A ROAD
OVER A MOUNTAIN.--AMONG THE BABWENDÃ‰.--AFRICAN MARKETS.--TRADING AMONG
THE TRIBES.--SHOELESS TRAVELLERS.--EXPERIMENTS IN COOKING.--LIMITED
STOCK OF PROVISIONS.--CENTRAL AFRICAN ANTS.--"JIGGAS."--DANGERS OF
UNPROTECTED FEET.


Promptly at the hour all were in their places. Frank was ready with the
opened book, from which he read:

     "On the 30th of March a messenger was despatched to Frank to
     superintend the transport of the goods overland to where I had
     arrived with the boat. The natives continued to be very amiable,
     and food was abundant and cheap. They visited our camp from morning
     to night, bringing their produce from a great distance. They are a
     very gentle and harmless tribe, the western BatekÃ©, and
     distinguishable by four cicatrices down each cheek. They are also
     remarkable for their numerous bird-snares--bird-lime being
     furnished by the _Ficus sycamorus_--and traps. About sunset a
     wide-spreading flock of large birds like parrots passed northeast
     over our camp, occupying nearly half an hour in passing. They were
     at too great an altitude to be recognized. Lead-colored
     water-snakes were very numerous, the largest being about seven feet
     in length and two and one half inches in diameter.

     [Illustration: VILLAGE IDOLS.]

     "Confined within the deep, narrow valley of the river, the hills
     rising to the height of about eight hundred feet above us, and
     exposed to the continued uproar of the river, we became almost
     stunned during our stay of the 31st.

     "On the 1st of April we cleared the Kalulu Fulls, and camped on the
     right bank below them. Our two absentees on the left side had
     followed us, and were signalling frequently to us, but we were
     helpless. The next day we descended a mile and a half of rapids,
     and in the passage one more canoe was lost, which reduced our
     flotilla to thirteen vessels.

     "About 2 P.M., to the general joy, appeared young Soudi and our two
     absentees who the day before had been signalling us from the
     opposite side of the river!

     "Soudi's adventures had been very strange. He had been swept down
     over the upper and lower Kalulu Falls and the intermediate rapids,
     and had been whirled round so often that he became confused. 'But
     clinging to my canoe,' he said, 'the wild river carried me down and
     down and down, from place to place, sometimes near a rock, and
     sometimes near the middle of the stream, until an hour after dark,
     when I saw it was near a rock; I jumped out, and, catching my
     canoe, drew it on shore. I had scarcely finished when my arms were
     seized, and I was bound by two men, who hurried me up to the top of
     the mountain, and then for an hour over the high land, until we
     came to a village. They then pushed me into a house, where they lit
     a fire, and when it was bright they stripped me naked and examined
     me. Though I pretended not to understand them, I knew enough to
     know that they were proud of their prize. They spoke kindly to me,
     and gave me plenty to eat; and while one of them slept, the other
     watched sharp lest I should run away. In the morning it was rumored
     over the village that a handsome slave was captured from a strange
     tribe, and many people came to see me, one of whom had seen us at
     Ntamo, and recognized me. This man immediately charged the two men
     with having stolen one of the white man's men, and he drew such a
     picture of you, master, with large eyes of fire and long hair, who
     owned a gun that shot all day, that all the people became
     frightened, and compelled the two men to take me back to where they
     had found me. They at once returned me my clothes, and brought me
     to the place near where I had tied my canoe. They then released me,
     saying, "Go to your king; here is food for you; and do not tell him
     what we have done to you; but tell him you met friends who saved
     you, and it shall be well with us."'

     "The other two men, seeking for means to cross the river, met Soudi
     sitting by his canoe. The three became so much encouraged at one
     another's presence that they resolved to cross the river rather
     than endure further anxiety in a strange land. Despair gave them
     courage, and though the river was rapid, they succeeded in
     crossing, a mile below the place they had started from, without
     accident.

     "On the 3d of April we descended another mile and a half of
     dangerous rapids, during which several accidents occurred. One
     canoe was upset which contained fifty tusks of ivory and a sack of
     beads. Four men had narrow escapes from drowning, but Uledi, my
     coxswain, saved them. I myself tumbled headlong into a small basin,
     and saved myself with difficulty from being swept away by the
     receding tide.

     [Illustration: HILLY REGION BACK FROM THE RIVER.]

     "Our system of progress was to begin each day with Frank leading
     the expedition overland to a camp at the head of some inlet, cove,
     or recess, near rapids or falls, where, with the older men, women,
     and children, he constructed a camp; the working party, consisting
     of the younger men, returning to assist me with the canoes down
     to the new camp. Anxious for the safety of the people, I
     superintended the river work myself, and each day led the way in
     the boat. On approaching rapids I selected three or four of the
     boat's crew (and always Uledi, the coxswain), and clambered along
     the great rocks piled along the base of the steeply sloping hills,
     until I had examined the scene. If the rapids or fall were deemed
     impassable by water, I planned the shortest and safest route across
     the projecting points, and then, mustering the people, strewed a
     broad track with bushes, over which, as soon as completed, we set
     to work to haul our vessels beyond the dangerous water, when we
     lowered them into the river, and pursued our way to camp, where
     Frank would be ready to give me welcome, and such a meal as the
     country afforded.

     "At GamfwÃ©'s the natives sold us abundance of bread, or rolls of
     pudding, of cassava flour, maize, cassava leaves, water-cresses,
     and the small Strychnos fruit, and, for the first time, lemons.
     Fowls were very dear, and a goat was too expensive a luxury in our
     now rapidly impoverishing state.

     "On the 8th we descended from GamfwÃ©'s to 'Whirlpool Narrows,'
     opposite Umvilingya. When near there we perceived that the eddy
     tides, which rushed up river along the bank, required very delicate
     and skilful manoeuvring. I experimented on the boat first, and
     attempted to haul her by cables round a rocky point from the bay
     near Whirlpool Narrows. Twice they snapped ropes and cables, and
     the second time the boat flew up river, borne on the crests of
     brown waves, with only Uledi and two men in her. Presently she
     wheeled into the bay, following the course of the eddy, and Uledi
     brought her in-shore. The third time we tried the operation with
     six cables of twisted rattan, about two hundred feet in length,
     with five men to each cable. The rocks rose singly in precipitous
     masses fifty feet above the river, and this extreme height
     increased the difficulty and rendered footing precarious, for
     furious eddies of past ages had drilled deep circular pits, like
     ovens, in them, four, six, even ten feet deep. However, with the
     utmost patience we succeeded in rounding these enormous blocks, and
     hauling the boat against the uneasy eddy tide to where the river
     resumed its natural downward flow. Below this, as I learned, were
     some two miles of boisterous water; but mid-river, though foaming
     in places, was not what we considered dangerous. We therefore
     resolved to risk it in mid-stream, and the boat's crew, never
     backward when they knew what lay in front of them, manned the boat,
     and in fifteen minutes we had taken her into a small creek near
     Umvilingya's landing, which ran up river between a ridge of rocks
     and the right bank. This act instilled courage into the canoe-men,
     and the boat-boys having volunteered to act as steersmen, with
     Frank as leader, all manned the canoes next morning, and succeeded
     in reaching my camp in good time without accident, though one canoe
     was taken within two hundred yards of Round Island Falls, between
     Isameh's and Umvilingya's.

     "At this place Frank and I treated ourselves to a pig, which we
     purchased from the chief Umvilingya for four cloths, we having been
     more than two weeks without meat.

     [Illustration: "LADY ALICE" OVER THE FALLS.]

     "On the 10th, having, because of illness, intrusted the boat to
     Manwa Sera and Uledi, they managed to get her jammed between two
     rocks near the entrance to Gavubu's Cove, and, as the after-section
     was sunk for a time, it appeared that the faithful craft would be
     lost here after her long and wonderful journey. Springing from my
     bed upon hearing of the threatened calamity, I mustered twenty
     active men and hastened to the scene, and soon, by inspiring every
     man to do his best, we were able to lift her out of her dangerous
     position, and take her to camp apparently uninjured.

     [Illustration: NATIVE MILL FOR GRINDING CORN.]

     "The lower end of Gavubu's Cove was reached on the 11th, and the
     next day by noon the land party and canoes were taken safely to the
     lower end of GarafwÃ©'s Bay. As our means were rapidly diminishing
     in this protracted struggle we maintained against the natural
     obstacles to our journey, we could only hope to reach the sea by
     resolute and continual industry during every hour of daylight. I
     accordingly instructed the canoe-men to be ready to follow me, as
     soon as they should be informed by a messenger that the boat had
     safely arrived in camp.

     "The commencement of "Lady Alice" Rapids was marked by a broad
     fall, and an interruption to the rapidly rushing river by a narrow
     ridgy islet of great rocks, which caused the obstructed stream to
     toss its waters in lateral waves against the centre, where they met
     waves from the right bank, and overlapping formed a lengthy dyke of
     foaming water.

     "Strong cane cables were lashed to the bow and stern, and three men
     were detailed to each, while five men assisted me in the boat. A
     month's experience of this kind of work had made us skilful and
     bold. But the rapids were more powerful, the river was much more
     contracted, and the impediments were greater than usual. On our
     right was an upright wall of massive boulders terminating in a
     narrow terrace three hundred feet high; behind the terrace, at a
     little distance, rose the rude hills to the height of twelve
     hundred feet above the river; above the hills rolled the
     table-land. On our left, four hundred yards from the bouldery wall,
     rose a lengthy and stupendous cliff line topped by a broad belt of
     forest, and at its base rose three rocky islets, one below another,
     against which the river dashed itself, disparting with a roaring
     surge.

     "We had scarcely ventured near the top of the rapids when, by a
     careless slackening of the stern cable, the current swept the boat
     from the hands of that portion of her crew whose duty it was to
     lower her carefully and cautiously down the fall, to the narrow
     line of ebb-flood below the rocky projection. Away into the centre
     of the angry, foaming, billowy stream the boat darted, dragging one
     man into the maddened flood, to whom, despite our awful position,
     I was able to lend a hand and lift into the boat.

     [Illustration: FALLS ON A TRIBUTARY STREAM.]

     "'Oars, my boys, and be steady! Uledi, to the helm!' were all the
     instructions I was able to shout, after which, standing at the bow
     of the boat, I guided the coxswain with my hand; for now, as we
     rode downward furiously on the crests of the proud waves, the human
     voice was weak against the overwhelming thunder of the angry river.
     Oars were only useful to assist the helm, for we were flying at a
     terrific speed past the series of boulders which strangled the
     river. Never did the rocks assume such hardness, such solemn
     grimness and bigness, never were they invested with such terrors
     and such grandeur of height, as while we were the cruel sport and
     prey of the brown-black waves, which whirled us round like a
     spinning-top, swung us aside, almost engulfed us in the rapidly
     subsiding troughs, and then hurled us upon the white, rageful
     crests of others. Ah! with what feelings we regarded this awful
     power which the great river had now developed! How we cringed under
     its imperious, compelling, and irresistible force! What lightning
     retrospects we cast upon our past lives! How impotent we felt
     before it!

     "'La il Allah, il Allah!' screamed young Mabruki. 'We are lost!
     yes, we are lost!'

     [Illustration: AN UPLAND STREAM AND NATIVE BRIDGE.]

     "After two miles we were abreast of the bay, or indentation, at
     which we had hoped to camp, but the strong river mocked our efforts
     to gain it. The flood was resolved we should taste the bitterness
     of death. A sudden rumbling noise, like the deadened sound of an
     earthquake, caused us to look below, and we saw the river heaved
     bodily upward, as though a volcano were about to belch around us.
     Up to the summit of this watery mound we were impelled; and then,
     divining what was about to take place, I shouted out, 'Pull, men,
     for your lives!'

     "A few frantic strokes drove us to the lower side of the mound, and
     before it had finished subsiding, and had begun its usual fatal
     circling, we were precipitated over a small fall, and sweeping down
     towards the inlet into which the NkenkÃ© Cataract tumbled, below the
     lowest lines of breakers of the Lady Alice Rapids. Once or twice we
     were flung scornfully aside, and spun around contemptuously, as
     though we were too insignificant to be wrecked; then, availing
     ourselves of a calm moment, we resumed our oars, and soon entering
     the ebb-tide, rowed up river and reached the sandy beach at the
     junction of the NkenkÃ© with the Livingstone. Arriving on shore, I
     despatched Uledi and young Shumari to run to meet the despairing
     people above, who had long before this been alarmed by the
     boat-boys, whose carelessness had brought about this accident, and
     by the sympathizing natives who had seen us, as they reported, sink
     in the whirlpools. In about an hour a straggling line of anxious
     souls appeared; and all that love of life and living things, with
     the full sense of the worth of living, returned to my heart, as my
     faithful followers rushed up one after another with their exuberant
     welcome to life, which gushed out of them in gesture, feature, and
     voice. And Frank, my amiable and trusty Frank, was neither last nor
     least in his professions of love and sympathy, and gratitude to Him
     who had saved us from a watery grave.

     [Illustration: THE NKENKÃ‰ RIVER ENTERING THE LIVINGSTONE BELOW THE
     LADY ALICE RAPIDS.]

     "The land party then returned with Frank to remove the goods to our
     new camp, and by night my tent was pitched within a hundred yards
     of the cataract mouth of the NkenkÃ©. We had four cataracts in view
     of us: the great river which emptied itself into the baylike
     expanse from the last line of the Lady Alice Rapids; two miles
     below, the river fell again, in a foamy line of waves; from the
     tall cliff south of us tumbled a river four hundred feet into the
     great river; and on our right, one hundred yards off, the NkenkÃ©
     rushed down steeply like an enormous cascade from the height of one
     thousand feet.

     "Very different was this scene of towering cliffs and lofty
     mountain walls, which daily discharged the falling streams from the
     vast uplands above and buried us within the deafening chasm, to
     that glassy flow of the Livingstone by the black, eerie forests of
     Usongora, Meno, and Kasera, and through the upper lands of the
     cannibal Wenya, where a single tremulous wave was a rarity. We now,
     surrounded by the daily terrors and hope-killing shocks of these
     apparently endless cataracts, and the loud boom of their baleful
     fury, remembered, with regretful hearts, the Sabbath stillness and
     dreamy serenity of those days. Beautiful was it then to glide among
     the lazy creeks of the spicy and palm-growing isles, where the
     broad-leafed Amomum vied in greenness with the drooping fronds of
     the Phrynium, where the myrrh and bdellium shrubs exhaled their
     fragrance side by side with the wild cassia, where the capsicum
     with its red-hot berries rose in embowering masses, and the
     Ipomoea's purple buds gemmed with color the tall stem of some
     sturdy tree. Environed by most dismal prospects, forever dinned by
     terrific sound, at all points confronted by the most hopeless
     outlook, we think that an Eden which we have left behind, and this
     a watery hell wherein we now are.

     "Though our involuntary descent of the Lady Alice Rapids from
     GamfwÃ©'s Bay to NkenkÃ© River Bay--a distance of three
     miles--occupied us but fifteen minutes, it was a work of four days
     to lower the canoes by cables. Experience of the vast force of the
     flood, and the brittleness of the rattan cables, had compelled us
     to fasten eight cables to each canoe, and to detail five men to
     each cable for the passage of the rapids. Yet, with all our
     precautions, almost each hour was marked with its special accident
     to man or canoe. One canoe, with a man named Nubi in it, was torn
     from the hands of forty men, swept down two miles, and sunk in the
     great whirlpool. Nubi clung to his vessel until taken down a second
     time, when he and the canoe were ejected fifty yards apart, but,
     being an expert swimmer, he regained it in the NkenkÃ© basin, and
     astride of its keel was circling round with the strong ebb-tide,
     when he was saved by the dashing Uledi and his young brother
     Shumari.

     "While returning to my labors along the bouldery heap which lined
     the narrow terrace opposite the islets, I observed another canoe,
     which contained the chief Waldi Rehani and two of my boat-bearers,
     Chiwonda and Muscati, drifting down helplessly near the verge of
     some slack water. The three men were confused, and benumbed with
     terror at the roar and hissing of the rapids. Being comparatively
     close to them, on the edge of a high crag, I suddenly shot out my
     voice with the full power of my lungs, in sharp, quick accents of
     command to paddle ashore, and the effect was wonderful. It awoke
     them like soldiers to the call of duty, and after five minutes'
     energetic use of their paddles they were saved. I have often been
     struck at the power of a quick, decisive tone. It appears to have
     an electric effect, riding rough-shod over all fears, indecision,
     and tremor, and, just as in this instance, I had frequently up
     river, when the people were inclined to get panic-stricken, or to
     despair, restored them to a sense of duty by affecting the
     sharp-cutting, steel-like, and imperious tone of voice, which
     seemed to be as much of a compelling power as powder to a bullet.
     But it should be remembered that a too frequent use of it spoils
     its effect.

     [Illustration: MODE OF PASSING BOATS OVER THE FALLS.]

     "From the 18th to the 21st we were busy among rapids and
     whirlpools, which brought us into BabwendÃ© territory, where we
     encamped. Nsangu, a village of the BasessÃ©, was opposite our
     camp, crowning with its palms and fields a hilly terrace projected
     from the mountain range, at whose richly wooded slopes or cliffy
     front, based with a long line of great boulders, we each day looked
     from the right bank of the river. The villagers sent a deputation
     to us with palm-wine and a small gift of cassava tubers. Upon
     asking them if there were any more cataracts, they replied that
     there was only one, and they exaggerated it so much that the very
     report struck terror and dismay into our people. They described it
     as falling from a height greater than the position on which their
     village was situated, which drew exclamations of despair from my
     followers. I, on the other hand, rather rejoiced at this, as I
     believed it might be 'Tuckey's Cataract,' which seemed to be
     eternally receding as we advanced. While the BatekÃ© above had
     constantly held out flattering prospects of 'only one more'
     cataract, I had believed that one to be Tuckey's Cataract, because
     map-makers have laid down a great navigably reach of river between
     Tuckey's upper cataract and the Yellala Falls--hence our object in
     clinging to the river, despite all obstacles, until that
     ever-receding cataract was reached. The distance we had labored
     through from the 16th of March to the 21st of April inclusive, a
     period of thirty-seven days, was only thirty-four miles!

     "On the 26th we reached the terrific fall described by the BasessÃ©
     people. The falls are called Inkisi, or the 'Charm;' they have no
     clear drop, but the river, being forced through a chasm only five
     hundred yards wide, is flanked by curling waves of destructive
     fury, which meet in the centre, overlap, and strike each other,
     while below is an absolute chaos of mad waters, leaping waves, deep
     troughs, contending watery ridges, tumbling and tossing for a
     distance of two miles. The commencement of this gorge is a lengthy
     island which seems to have been a portion or slice of the
     table-land fallen flat, as it were, from a height of one thousand
     feet.

     "The natives above Inkisi descended from their breezy homes on the
     table-land to visit the strangers. I asked if there was another
     cataract below. 'No,' said they, 'at least only a little one, which
     you can pass without trouble.'

     "'Ah,' thought I to myself, 'this great cataract then must be
     Tuckey's Cataract, and the "little one," I suppose, was too
     contemptible an affair to be noticed, or perhaps it was covered
     over by high water, for map-makers have a clear, wide--three miles
     wide--stream to the Falls of Yellala. Good! I will haul my canoes
     up the mountain and pass over the table-land, as I must now cling
     to this river to the end, having followed it so long.'

     "My resolution was soon communicated to my followers, who looked
     perfectly blank at the proposition. The natives heard me, and,
     seeing the silence and reluctance of the people, they asked the
     cause, and I told them it was because I intended to drag our
     vessels up the mountain.

     "Having decided upon the project, it only remained to make a road
     and to begin, but in order to obtain the assistance of the
     aborigines, which I was anxious for, in order to relieve my people
     from much of the fatigue, the first day all hands were mustered for
     road-making. Our numerous axes, which we had purchased in Manyema
     and in Uregga, came into very efficient use now, for, by night, a
     bush-strewn path fifteen hundred yards in length had been
     constructed.

     [Illustration: VILLAGE ON THE TABLE-LAND.]

     "By 8 A.M. of the 26th our exploring-boat and a small canoe were on
     the summit of the table-land at a new camp we had formed. As the
     feat was performed without ostentation, the native chiefs were in a
     state of agreeable wonder. After an hour's 'talk' and convivial
     drinking of palm-wine they agreed, for a gift of forty cloths, to
     bring six hundred men to assist us to haul up the monster canoes we
     possessed, two or three of which were of heavy teak, over seventy
     feet in length, and weighing over three tons. A large number of my
     men were then detailed to cut rattan canes as a substitute for
     ropes, and as many were brittle and easily broken, this involved
     frequent delays. Six men under KachÃ©chÃ© were also despatched
     overland to a distance of ten miles to explore the river, and to
     prepare the natives for our appearance.

     "By the evening of the 28th all our vessels were safe on the
     highest part of the table-land. Having become satisfied that all
     was going well in camp, and that Manwa Sera and his men were
     capable of superintending it, with the aid of the natives, I
     resolved to take Frank and the boat's crew, women, and children,
     and goods of the expedition, to the frontier of Nzabi, and
     establish a camp near the river, at a point where we should again
     resume our toil in the deep defile through which the mighty river
     stormed along its winding course.

     [Illustration: A FIGURE IN THE MARKET-PLACE.]

     "The BabwendÃ© natives were exceedingly friendly, even more so than
     the amiable BatekÃ©. Gunpowder was abundant with them, and every
     male capable of carrying a gun possessed one, often more. Delft
     ware and British crockery were also observed in their hands, such
     as plates, mugs, shallow dishes, wash-basins, galvanized iron
     spoons, Birmingham cutlery, and other articles of European
     manufacture obtained through the native markets, which are held in
     an open space between each district. For example, Nzabi district
     holds a market on a Monday, and BabwendÃ© from Zinga, Mowa farther
     down, and Inkisi, and BasessÃ©, from across the river attend, as
     there is a ferry below Zinga, and articles such as European salt,
     gunpowder, guns, cloth, crockery, glass, and iron ware, of which
     the currency consists, are bartered for produce such as
     ground-nuts, palm-oil, palm-nuts, palm-wine, cassava bread and
     tubers, yams, maize, sugar-cane, beans, native earthenware, onions,
     lemons, bananas, guavas, sweet limes, pineapples, black pigs,
     goats, fowls, eggs, ivory, and a few slaves, who are generally
     BatekÃ© or Northern Basundi. On Tuesday the district above Inkisi
     Falls holds its market, at which Mowa, Nzabi, and the district
     above Inkisi attend. On Wednesday the Umvilingya, Lemba, and Nsangu
     districts hold a market. On Thursday most of the BabwendÃ© cross the
     river over to Nsangu, and the BasessÃ© have the honor of holding a
     market on their own soil. On Friday the market is again held at
     Nzabi, and the series runs its course in the same order. Thus,
     without trading caravans or commercial expeditions, the aborigines
     of these districts are well supplied with almost all they require
     without the trouble and danger of proceeding to the coast. From
     district to district, market to market, and hand to hand, European
     fabrics and wares are conveyed along both sides of the river, and
     along the paths of traffic. By this mode of traffic a keg of powder
     landed at Funta, Ambriz, Ambrizette, or Kinsembo, requires about
     five years to reach the Bangala. The first musket was landed in
     Angola in about the latter part of the fifteenth century, for Diogo
     CÃ£o only discovered the mouth of the Congo in 1485. It has taken
     three hundred and ninety years for four muskets to arrive at
     Rubunga in Nganza, nine hundred and sixty-five miles from Point de
     PadrÃ£o, where Diogo CÃ£o erected his memorial column in honor of the
     discovery of the Congo.

     [Illustration: AFRICAN MARKET SCENE.]

     "We discovered cloth to be so abundant among the BabwendÃ© that it
     was against our conscience to purchase even a fowl, for, naturally,
     the nearer we approached civilization cloth became cheaper in
     value, until finally a fowl cost four yards of our thick sheeting!
     Frank and I therefore lived upon the same provisions as our
     people. Our store of sugar had run out in Uregga, our coffee was
     finished at Vinya Njara, and at Inkisi Falls our tea, alas! alas!
     came to an end.

     [Illustration: VIEW IN THE BABWENDÃ‰ COUNTRY.]

     "What would we not have given for a pair of shoes apiece? Though I
     had kept one pair of worn-out shoes by me, my last new pair had
     been put on in the jungles of doleful Uregga, and now six weeks'
     rough wear over the gritty iron and clink-stone, trap, and granite
     blocks along the river had ground through soles and uppers, until I
     began to feel anxious. Frank had been wearing sandals made out of
     my leather portmanteaus, and slippers out of our gutta-percha
     pontoon; but climbing over the rocks and rugged steeps wore them to
     tatters in such quick succession, that it was with the utmost
     difficulty that I was enabled, by appealing to the pride of the
     white man, to induce him to persevere in the manufacture of sandals
     for his own use. Frequently, on suddenly arriving in camp from my
     wearying labors, I would discover him with naked feet, and would
     reprove him for shamelessly exposing his white feet to the vulgar
     gaze of the aborigines! In Europe this would not be considered
     indelicate, but in barbarous Africa the feet should be covered as
     much as the body; for there is a small modicum of superiority shown
     even in clothing the feet. Not only on moral grounds did I urge him
     to cover his feet, but also for his own comfort and health; for the
     great cataract gorge and table-land above it, besides abounding in
     ants, mosquitoes, and vermin, are infested with three dangerous
     insects, which prey upon the lower limbs of man--the 'jigga' from
     Brazil, the guinea-worm, and an entozoon, which, depositing its
     eggs in the muscles, produces a number of short, fat worms and
     severe tumors. I also discovered, from the examples in my camp,
     that the least abrasion of the skin was likely, if not covered, to
     result in an ulcer. My own person testified to this, for an injury
     to the thumb of my left hand, injured by a fall on the rocks at
     GamfwÃ©'s, had culminated in a painful wound, which I daily
     cauterized; but though bathed, burned, plastered, and bandaged
     twice a day, I had been at this time a sufferer for over a month.

     "In the absence of positive knowledge as to how long we might be
     toiling in the cataracts, we were all compelled to be extremely
     economical. Goat and pig meat were such luxuries that we declined
     to think of them as being possible with our means; tea, coffee,
     sugar, sardines, were fast receding into the memory-land of past
     pleasures, and chickens had reached such prices that they were rare
     in our camp. We possessed one ram from far Uregga, and Mirambo, the
     black riding-ass--the other two asses had died a few weeks
     before--but we should have deserved the name of cannibals had we
     dared to think of sacrificing the pets of the camp. Therefore--by
     the will of the gods--contentment had to be found in boiled 'duff,'
     or cold cassava bread, ground-nuts, or peanuts, yams, and green
     bananas. To make such strange food palatable was an art that we
     possessed in a higher degree than our poor comrades. They were
     supplied with the same materials as we ourselves, but the
     preparation was different. My dark followers simply dried their
     cassava, and then, pounding it, made the meal into porridge.
     Ground-nuts they threw into the ashes, and when sufficiently baked
     ate them like hungry men.

     [Illustration: NYITTI, AN AFRICAN POTATO.]

     "For me such food was too crude; besides, my stomach, called to
     sustain a brain and body strained to the utmost by
     responsibilities, required that some civility should be shown to
     it. Necessity roused my faculties, and a jaded stomach goaded my
     inventive powers to a high pitch. I called my faithful cook, told
     him to clean and wash mortar and pestle for the preparation of a
     'high art' dish. Frank approached also to receive instruction, so
     that, in my absence, he might remind Marzouk, the cook, of each
     particular. First we rinsed in clear, cold brook-water from the
     ravines some choice cassava, or manioc tops, and these were placed
     in the water to be bruised. Marzouk understood this part very well,
     and soon pounded them to the consistence of a green porridge. To
     this I then added fifty shelled nuts of the _Arachis hypogoea_,
     three small specimens of the _Dioscorea alata_, boiled and sliced
     cold; a tablespoonful of oil extracted from the _Arachis
     hypogoea_; a tablespoonful of wine of the _Elais Guineensis_, a
     little salt, and sufficient powdered capsicum. This imposing and
     admirable mixture was pounded together, fried, and brought into the
     tent, along with toasted cassava pudding, hot and steaming, on the
     only Delft plate we possessed. Within a few minutes our breakfast
     was spread out on the medicine-chest which served me for a table,
     and at once a keen appetite was inspired by the grateful smell of
     my artful compound. After invoking a short blessing Frank and I
     rejoiced our souls and stomachs with the savory mess, and flattered
     ourselves that, though British paupers and Sing-Sing convicts might
     fare better, perhaps, thankful content crowned our hermit repast."

     [Illustration: UGOGO COOKING-POT.]

"That will do for this evening," said Frank, as he closed the book at
the end of the chapter. "We will leave Mr. Stanley and his only white
companion at their frugal feast, and congratulate them on their
ingenuity in making the most that was possible out of the limited
supplies which the native markets afforded them."

[Illustration: WILD BULL OF EQUATORIAL AFRICA.]




CHAPTER XVI.

A DISAPPOINTMENT.--NOT TUCKEY'S FURTHEST.--BUILDING NEW CANOES.--THE
_LIVINGSTONE_, _STANLEY_, AND _JASON_.--FALLS BELOW INKISI.--FRANK
POCOCK DROWNED.--STANLEY'S GRIEF.--_IN MEMORIAM_.--MUTINY IN CAMP.--HOW
IT WAS QUELLED.--LOSS OF THE _LIVINGSTONE_.--THE CHIEF CARPENTER
DROWNED.--ISANGILA CATARACT.--TUCKEY'S SECOND SANGALLA.--ABANDONING THE
BOATS.--OVERLAND TO BOMA.--THE EXPEDITION STARVING.--A LETTER ASKING
HELP.--VOLUNTEER COURIERS.--DELAYS AT STARTING.--VAIN EFFORTS TO BUY
FOOD.--A DREARY MARCH.--SUFFERINGS OF STANLEY'S PEOPLE.--THE LEADER'S
ANXIETY.


Fred took the chair the next day, and resumed the narrative at the point
where it was dropped by his cousin. He turned several leaves of the book
in slow succession, and said as he did so:

"Mr. Stanley was destined to be greatly disappointed. In passing Inkisi
Falls, he felt certain that he had at last reached Tuckey's Cataract,
and henceforth would have an uninterrupted passage to the sea. But he
soon found that there were other and larger cataracts to be passed, and
as he had lost nine of his canoes he was in great need of an addition to
his fleet. While the transport party and the natives were busy hauling
the canoes around Inkisi Falls, taking them first to the table-land,
twelve hundred feet high, and then down again, the carpenters were set
to cutting down two of the largest trees and hollowing them out for
boats. Two boats, the _Livingstone_ and the _Stanley_, were then made;
the former, hewn from a single log of teak, was fifty-four feet long,
two feet four inches deep, and three feet two inches wide. The _Stanley_
was not so large, but she proved an excellent boat, and was a credit to
her builders. Afterwards a third boat was completed, to take the place
of the _Jason_, which was lost at Kalulu Falls.

"The country around Inkisi Falls was covered with fine timber. Mr.
Stanley tells us that many of the trees were twelve feet and upwards in
circumference, and their trunks were without branches for forty or fifty
feet. The teak tree from which the _Livingstone_ was made was thirteen
feet three inches in circumference, and when prostrate on the ground
gave a branchless log fifty-five feet in length.

[Illustration: THE NEW CANOES, THE "LIVINGSTONE" AND THE "STANLEY."]

"The work of descending the various rapids and falls below Inkisi," said
Fred, "was much like what had engaged the time and attention of the
explorers since their departure from Stanley Pool. In some instances the
boats were run through the rapids where it was thought they could be
carried safely; in others they were lowered by means of cables, and at
the worst falls they were dragged overland in the manner already
described. In the passage of the Mowa Rapids the _Lady Alice_ struck the
rocks, and was so severely injured that the repair of the boat took an
entire day's labor by Mr. Stanley and Frank Pocock. Even then she took
water badly, and with their limited materials it was found impossible to
stop the leak properly. They were finally able to do so, with some
beeswax which was brought to them by the natives.

"The third of June was a melancholy day for Mr. Stanley, as it was
marked by the drowning of Frank Pocock, his last remaining white
companion. The circumstances were these:

[Illustration: CUTTING OUT THE NEW "LIVINGSTONE" CANOE.]

"Frank had been suffering from ulcers upon his feet and was unable to
walk. Mr. Stanley had gone from the camp at Mowa to establish a new camp
above the falls of Zinga, three miles lower down the Congo. Orders had
been given for the boats to be lowered carefully down the rapids, while
Frank was to be carried in a hammock. The hammock-bearers did not arrive
as soon as expected, and as the _Jason_, under the command of the
skilful Uledi, was starting to descend the rapids, Frank insisted upon
being taken on board. In the rapids the boat was overturned in a
whirlpool, and out of its eleven occupants three were drowned, among
them "the little master," as Frank was called by the men of the
expedition. His body was found by a fisherman, four or five days later,
floating in the water below the rapids. Mr. Stanley gave the locality
the name of Pocock Basin, in memory of the friend and companion whose
loss he so deeply mourned that for some days he was hardly able to
attend to the pressing duties of his position.

[Illustration: FRANCIS JOHN POCOCK.

Drowned June 3, 1877.]

"Of his feelings on this sad occasion Mr. Stanley says:

     "As I looked at the empty tent and the dejected, woe-stricken
     servants, a choking sensation of unutterable grief filled me. The
     sorrow-laden mind fondly recalled the lost man's inestimable
     qualities, his extraordinary gentleness, his patient temper, his
     industry, cheerfulness, and his tender friendship; it dwelt upon
     the pleasure of his society, his general usefulness, his piety, and
     cheerful trust in our success, with which he had renewed our hope
     and courage; and each new virtue that it remembered only served to
     intensify my sorrow for his loss, and to suffuse my heart with pity
     and regret, that after the exhibition of so many admirable
     qualities and such long, faithful service, he should depart this
     life so abruptly, and without reward.

     "When curtained about by anxieties, and the gloom created by the
     almost insurmountable obstacles we encountered, his voice had ever
     made music in my soul. When grieving for the hapless lives that
     were lost, he consoled me. But now my friendly comforter and
     true-hearted friend was gone! Ah, had some one then but relieved me
     from my cares, and satisfied me that my dark followers would see
     their Zanjian homes again, I would that day have gladly ended the
     struggle, and, crying out, 'Who dies earliest dies best,' have
     embarked in my boat and dropped calmly over the cataracts into
     eternity."

[Illustration: FALL OF THE EDWIN ARNOLD RIVER INTO THE POCOCK BASIN.]

"A few days after the death of Frank Pocock," continued Fred, there was
a mutinous outbreak in the camp, many of the men refusing to work. They
said they would rather be slaves to the natives than stay where almost
every day some of their number were drowned in the river. Thirty-one of
the men packed up their property and left the camp. Mr. Stanley sent
KachÃ©chÃ©, the detective, after them, and he also interested the chiefs
of the tribes around Zinga to arrest the mutineers and bring them back
to camp.

[Illustration: THE CHIEF CARPENTER CARRIED OVER ZINGA FALL.]

"Diplomacy and force combined secured the return of the rebellious men,
and they were fully pardoned for their defection. Mr. Stanley pointed
out to them the necessity of pushing forward, and on the morning after
they came back everybody went at work with a will to pass the dreaded
Zinga Fall.

"Assisted by one hundred and fifty Zinga natives whom Mr. Stanley had
hired, three of the boats were drawn up to the level of the rocky point
above Zinga Fall on the morning of June 23d. The fourth boat was the
_Livingstone_, whose construction has been described; it weighed about
three tons, and when only a short distance above the shore the cable
snapped and the boat slid back into the river. The chief carpenter of
the expedition clung to it, and in the excitement of the moment he
sprang into it just as it left the shore. Being unable to swim, he could
not save himself, and was carried over the fall. Neither the carpenter
nor the boat were ever seen again. It is supposed that the boat was
jammed and caught among the rocks at the bottom of the river, where it
was driven by the terrible force of the cataract.

[Illustration: THE MASASSA FALLS, AND THE ENTRANCE INTO POCOCK BASIN, OR
BOLOBOLO POOL.]

"For another month and more the steadily diminishing band of explorers
toiled among the rapids and cataracts of the Congo, and on the 30th of
July drew their boats into a little cove about fifty yards above the
Isangila cataract, the 'Second Sangalla' of Captain Tuckey. Here Mr.
Stanley learned that Embomma, or Boma, was only five days away by land,
and that there were three other cataracts, besides several rapids,
before permanently smooth water could be reached. And here," said Fred,
"I will turn to the book and read Mr. Stanley's account of how the
explorers reached the sea."

[Illustration: CAMP AT KILOLO, ABOVE ISANGILA FALLS.]

     "There was not the slightest doubt in my mind that the Isangila
     cataract was the second Sangalla of Captain Tuckey and Professor
     Smith, and that the Sanga Yellala of Tuckey and the Sanga Jelalla
     of Smith was the Nsongo Yellala, though I could not induce the
     natives to pronounce the words as the members of the unfortunate
     Congo Expedition of 1816 spelled them.

     "As the object of the journey had now been attained, and the great
     river of Livingstone had been connected with the Congo of Tuckey, I
     saw no reason to follow it farther, or to expend the little
     remaining vitality we possessed in toiling through the last four
     cataracts.

     "I announced, therefore, to the gallant but wearied Wangwana that
     we should abandon the river and strike overland for Embomma. The
     delight of the people manifested itself in loud and fervid
     exclamations of gratitude to Allah! Quadruple ration-money was also
     distributed to each man, woman, and child; but, owing to the
     excessive poverty of the country, and the keen trading instincts
     and avaricious spirit of the aborigines, little benefit did the
     long-enduring, famine-stricken Wangwana derive from my liberality.

     "Fancy knick-knacks, iron spears, knives, axes, copper, brass wire,
     were then distributed to them, and I emptied the medicine out of
     thirty vials, and my private clothes-bags, blankets, waterproofs,
     every available article of property that might be dispensed with,
     were also given away, without distinction of rank or merit, to
     invest in whatever eatables they could procure. The 31st of July
     was consequently a busy day, devoted to bartering, but few Wangwana
     were able to boast at evening that they had obtained a tithe of the
     value of the articles they had sold, and the character of the food
     actually purchased was altogether unfit for people in such poor
     condition of body.

     "At sunset we lifted the brave boat, after her adventurous journey
     across Africa, and carried her to the summit of some rocks about
     five hundred yards north of the fall, to be abandoned to her fate.
     Three years before, Messenger of Teddington had commenced her
     construction; two years previous to this date she was coasting the
     bluffs of Uzongora on Lake Victoria; twelve months later she was
     completing her last twenty miles of the circumnavigation of Lake
     Tanganika, and on the 31st of July, 1877, after a journey of nearly
     seven thousand miles up and down broad Africa, she was consigned to
     her resting-place above the Isangili cataract, to bleach and to rot
     to dust!

       *       *       *       *       *

     "A wayworn, feeble, and suffering column were we when, on the 1st
     of August, we filed across the rocky terrace of Isangila and
     sloping plain, and strode up the ascent to the table-land. Nearly
     forty men filled the sick-list with dysentery, ulcers, and scurvy,
     and the victims of the latter disease were steadily increasing.
     Yet withal I smiled proudly when I saw the brave hearts cheerily
     respond to my encouraging cries. A few, however, would not believe
     that within five or six days they should see Europeans. They
     disdained to be considered so credulous, but at the same time they
     granted that the 'master' was quite right to encourage his people
     with promises of speedy relief.

     [Illustration: VIEW FROM THE TABLE-LAND.]

     "So we surmounted the table-land, but we could not bribe the
     wretched natives to guide us to the next village. 'Mirambo,' the
     riding-ass, managed to reach half-way up the table-land, but he
     also was too far exhausted through the miserable attenuation which
     the poor grass of the western region had wrought in his frame to
     struggle farther. We could only pat him on the neck and say,
     'Good-bye, old boy; farewell, old hero! A bad world this for you
     and for us. We must part at last.' The poor animal appeared to know
     that we were leaving him, for he neighed after us--a sickly,
     quavering neigh, that betrayed his excessive weakness. When we last
     turned to look at him he was lying on the path, but looking up the
     hill with pointed ears, as though he were wondering why he was left
     alone, and whither his human friends and companions by flood and
     field were wandering.

     "After charging the chief of Mbinda to feed him with cassava leaves
     and good grass from his fields, I led the caravan over the serried
     levels of the lofty upland.

     "At the end of this district, about a mile from Mwato Wandu, we
     appeared before a village whose inhabitants permitted us to pass on
     for a little distance, when they suddenly called out to us with
     expostulatory tones at an almost shrieking pitch. The old chief,
     followed by about fifty men, about forty of whom carried guns,
     hurried up to me and sat down in the road.

     "In a composed and consequential tone he asked, 'Know you I am the
     king of this country?'

     "I answered, mildly, 'I knew it not, my brother.'

     "'I am the king, and how can you pass through my country without
     paying me?'

     "'Speak, my friend; what is it the MundelÃ© can give you?'

     "'Rum. I want a big bottle of rum, and then you can pass on.'

     "'Rum?'

     "'Yes, rum, for I am the king of this country!'

     "'Rum!' I replied, wonderingly.

     "'Rum; rum is good. I love rum,' he said, with a villainous leer.

     "Uledi, coming forward, impetuously asked, 'What does this old man
     want, master?'

     "'He wants rum, Uledi. Think of it!'

     [Illustration: "I WANT RUM."]

     "'There's rum for him,' he said, irreverently slapping his majesty
     over the face, who, as the stool was not very firm, fell over
     prostrate. Naturally this was an affront, and I reproved Uledi for
     it. Yet it seemed that he had extricated us from a difficult
     position by his audacity, for the old chief and his people hurried
     off to their village, where there was great excitement and
     perturbation, but we could not stay to see the end.

     "Ever and anon, as we rose above the ridged swells, we caught a
     glimpse of the wild river on whose bosom we had so long floated.
     Still white and foaming, it rushed on impetuously seaward through
     the sombre defile. Then we descended into a deep ravine, and
     presently, with uneasy, throbbing hearts, we breasted a steep slope
     rough with rock, and from its summit we looked abroad over a
     heaving, desolate, and ungrateful land. The grass was tall and
     ripe, and waved and rustled mournfully before the upland breezes.
     Soon the road declined into a valley, and we were hid in a deep
     fold, round which rose the upland, here to the west shagged with a
     thin forest, to the north with ghastly sere grass, out of which
     rose a few rocks, gray and sad. On our left was furze, with scrub.
     At the bottom of this, sad and desolate, ran a bright, crystal
     clear brook. Up again to the summit we strove to gain the crest of
     a ridge, and then, down once more the tedious road wound in crooked
     curves to the depth of another ravine, on the opposite side of
     which rose sharply and steeply, to the wearying height of twelve
     hundred feet, the range called Yangi-Yangi. At 11 A.M. we in the
     van had gained the lofty summit, and fifteen minutes afterwards we
     descried a settlement and its cluster of palms. An hour afterwards
     we were camped on a bit of level plateau to the south of the
     villages of Ndambi Mbongo.

     "The chiefs appeared, dressed in scarlet military coats of a past
     epoch. We asked for food for beads. 'Cannot.' 'For wire?' 'We don't
     want wire!' 'For cowries?' 'Are we bushmen?' 'For cloth?' 'You must
     wait three days for a market'. If you have got rum you can have
     plenty!!' Rum! Heavens! Over two years and eight months ago we
     departed from the shores of the Eastern Ocean, and they ask us for
     rum!

     "Yet they were not insolent, but unfeeling; they were not rude, but
     steely selfish. We conversed with them sociably enough, and
     obtained encouragement. A strong, healthy man would reach Embomma
     in three days. Three days! Only three days off from food--from
     comforts--luxuries even! Ah me!

     "The next day, when morning was graying, we lifted our weakened
     limbs for another march. And such a march!--the path all thickly
     strewn with splinters of suet-colored quartz, which increased the
     fatigue and pain. The old men and the three mothers, with their
     young infants born at the cataracts of Masassa and Zinga, and
     another near the market-town of Manyanga, in the month of June,
     suffered greatly. Then might be seen that affection for one another
     which appealed to my sympathies, and endeared them to me still
     more. Two of the younger men assisted each of the old, and the
     husbands and fathers lifted their infants on their shoulders and
     tenderly led their wives along.

     [Illustration: VILLAGE SCENE, WITH GRANARY IN FOREGROUND.]

     "Up and down the desolate and sad land wound the poor, hungry
     caravan. Bleached whiteness of ripest grass, gray rock-piles here
     and there, looming up solemn and sad in their grayness, a thin
     grove of trees now and then visible on the heights and in the
     hollows--such were the scenes that with every uplift of a ridge or
     rising crest of a hill met our hungry eyes. Eight miles our
     strength enabled us to make, and then we camped in the middle of an
     uninhabited valley, where we were supplied with water from the
     pools which we discovered in the course of a dried-up stream.

     "Our march on the third day was a continuation of the scenes of the
     day preceding until about ten o'clock, when we arrived at the
     summit of a grassy and scrub-covered ridge, which we followed until
     three in the afternoon. The van then appeared before the miserable
     settlement of Nsanda, or, as it is sometimes called, Banza (town)
     N'sanda N'sanga. Marching through the one street of the first
     village in melancholy and silent procession, voiceless as sphinxes,
     we felt our way down into a deep gully, and crawled up again to the
     level of the village site, and camped about two hundred yards away.
     It was night before all had arrived.

     [Illustration: IN THE VALLEY.]

     "After we had erected our huts and lifted the tent into its usual
     place, the chief of Nsanda appeared. He was kindly,
     sociable--laughed, giggled, and was amusing. Of course he knew
     Embomma, had frequently visited there, and carried thither large
     quantities of _Nguba_, ground-nuts, which he had sold for rum. We
     listened, as in duty bound, with a melancholy interest. Then I
     suddenly asked him if he would carry a _makanda_, or letter, to
     Embomma, and allow three of my men to accompany him. He was too
     great to proceed himself, but he would despatch two of his young
     men the next day. His consent I obtained only after four hours of
     earnest entreaty. It was finally decided that I should write a
     letter, and the two young natives would be ready next day. After my
     dinner--three fried bananas, twenty roasted ground-nuts, and a cup
     of muddy water, my usual fare now--by a lamp made out of a piece of
     rotten sheeting steeped in a little palm-butter I wrote the
     following letter:

  "'VILLAGE OF NSANDA, _August_ 4, 1877.

     "'_To any Gentleman who speaks English at Embomma:_

     "DEAR SIR,--I have arrived at this place from Zanzibar with one
     hundred and fifteen souls, men, women, and children. We are now in
     a state of imminent starvation. We can buy nothing from the
     natives, for they laugh at our kinds of cloth, beads, and wire.
     There are no provisions in the country that may be purchased,
     except on market-days, and starving people cannot afford to wait
     for these markets. I, therefore, have made bold to despatch three
     of my young men, natives of Zanzibar, with a boy named Robert
     Feruzi, of the English Mission at Zanzibar, with this letter,
     craving relief from you. I do not know you; but I am told there is
     an Englishman at Embomma, and as you are a Christian and a
     gentleman, I beg you not to disregard my request. The boy Robert
     will be better able to describe our lone condition than I can tell
     you in this letter. We are in a state of the greatest distress; but
     if your supplies arrive in time, I may be able to reach Embomma
     within four days. I want three hundred cloths, each four yards
     long, of such quality as you trade with, which is very different
     from that we have; but better than all would be ten or fifteen
     man-loads of rice or grain to fill their pinched bellies
     immediately, as even with the cloths it would require time to
     purchase food, and starving people cannot wait. The supplies must
     arrive within two days, or I may have a fearful time of it among
     the dying. Of course I hold myself responsible for any expense you
     may incur in this business. What is wanted is immediate relief; and
     I pray you to use your utmost energies to forward it at once. For
     myself, if you have such little luxuries as tea, coffee, sugar, and
     biscuits by you, such as one man can easily carry, I beg you on my
     own behalf that you will send a small supply, and add to the great
     debt of gratitude due to you upon the timely arrival of the
     supplies for my people. Until that time I beg you to believe me,

  "'Yours sincerely,
  "'H. M. STANLEY,
  "'_Commanding Anglo-American Expedition_
  _for Exploration of Africa._

      "'_P.S._--You may not know me by name; I therefore add, I am the
      person that discovered Livingstone in 1871.--H. M. S.'

      "I also wrote a letter in French, and another in Spanish as a
      substitute for Portuguese, as I heard at Nsanda that there was one
      Englishman, one Frenchman, and three Portuguese at Embomma; but
      there were conflicting statements, some saying that there was no
      Englishman, but a Dutchman. However, I imagined I was sure to
      obtain provisions--for most European merchants understand either
      English, French, or Spanish.

      [Illustration: ANT-HILLS ON THE ROAD TO BOMA.]

      "The chiefs and boat's crew were called to my tent. I then told
      them that I had resolved to despatch four messengers to the white
      men at Embomma, with letters asking for food, and wished to know
      the names of those most likely to travel quickly and through
      anything that interposed to prevent them; for it might be possible
      that so small a number of men might be subjected to delays and
      interruptions, and that the guides might loiter on the way, and so
      protract the journey until relief would arrive too late.

      "The response was not long coming, for Uledi sprang up and said,
      'Oh, master, don't talk more; I am ready now. See, I will only
      buckle on my belt, and I shall start at once, and nothing will
      stop me. I will follow on the track like a leopard.'

      "'And I am one,' said KachÃ©chÃ©. 'Leave us alone, master. If there
      are white men at Embomma, we will find them out. We will walk, and
      walk, and when we cannot walk we will crawl.'

      "'Leave off talking, men,' said Muini PembÃ©, 'and allow others to
      speak, won't you? Hear me, my master. I am your servant. I will
      outwalk the two. I will carry the letter, and plant it before the
      eyes of the white men.'

      [Illustration: ONE OF THE GUIDES.]

      "'I will go, too, sir,' said Robert.

      "'Good. It is just as I should wish it; but, Robert, you cannot
      follow these three men. You will break down, my boy.'

      "'Oh, we will carry him if he breaks down,' said Uledi. 'Won't we
      KachÃ©chÃ©?'

      "'Inshallah!' responded KachÃ©chÃ©, decisively. 'We must have Robert
      along with us, otherwise the white men won't understand us.'

      "Early the next day the two guides appeared, but the whole of the
      morning was wasted in endeavoring to induce them to set off. Uledi
      waxed impatient, and buckled on his accoutrements, drawing his
      belt so tight about his waist that it was perfectly painful to
      watch him, and said, 'Give us the letters, master; we will not
      wait for the pagans. Our people will be dead before we start.
      Regard them, will you! They are sprawling about the camp without
      any life in them. Goee--Go-ee--Go-ee.' Finally, at noon, the
      guides and messengers departed in company.

      "Meanwhile a bale of cloth and a sack of beads were distributed,
      and the strongest and youngest men despatched abroad in all
      directions to forage for food. Late in the afternoon they arrived
      in camp weakened and dispirited, having, despite all efforts,
      obtained but a few bundles of the miserable ground-nuts and
      sufficient sweet potatoes to give three small ones to each person,
      though they had given twenty times their value for each one. The
      heartless reply of the spoiled aborigines was, 'Wait for the
      zandu,' or market, which was to be held in two days at Nsanda;
      for, as among the BabwendÃ©, each district has its respective days
      for marketing. Still what we had obtained was a respite from
      death; and, on the morning of the 5th, the people were prepared to
      drag their weary limbs nearer to the expected relief."

      [Illustration: CATCHING ANTS FOR FOOD.]




CHAPTER XVII.

THE WEARY MARCH RESUMED.--RETURN OF THE MESSENGERS.--ARRIVAL OF
RELIEF.--SCENE IN CAMP.--DISTRIBUTION OF PROVISIONS.--THE SONG OF
JOY.--A WELCOME LETTER.--"ENOUGH NOW; FALL TO."--PERSONAL LUXURIES FOR
THE LEADER.--"PALE ALE! SHERRY! PORT WINE! CHAMPAGNE! TEA! COFFEE! WHITE
SUGAR! WHEATEN BREAD!"--STANLEY'S REPLY TO THE GENEROUS
STRANGERS.--SUMMARY PUNISHMENT FOR THEFT.--GREETING
CIVILIZATION.--RECEPTION BY WHITE MEN.--THE FREEDOM OF BOMA.--LIFTED
INTO THE HAMMOCK.--CHARACTERISTICS OF BOMA.--A BANQUET AND
FAREWELL.--PONTA DA LENHA.--OUT ON THE OCEAN.--ADIEU TO THE CONGO.


After a pause of a few minutes, Fred continued the story of the weary
march of the next day, and the formation of the camp near Mbinda, close
to a cemetery where the graves were decorated with the property of their
occupants. Many pitchers, bowls, mugs, and other articles of European
manufacture were displayed there, and indicated the free intercourse of
the natives with the merchants of Embomma.

[Illustration: MBINDA CEMETERY.]

"The natives," said Fred, "continued indifferent to the sufferings of
the starving travellers, and persistently refused to sell any food.
Early on the morning of the 6th of August the party moved out, and after
toiling painfully over the flinty path went into camp near Banza Mbuko
about 9 A.M. In despair the people flung themselves on the ground, and
some of them appeared ready to welcome death as a relief from their
misery. And now," continued the youth, "let us turn again to Mr.
Stanley's narrative:

     "Suddenly the shrill voice of a little boy was heard saying, 'Oh! I
     see Uledi and KachÃ©chÃ© coming down the hill, and there are plenty
     of men following them!'

     "'What! what! what!' broke out eagerly from several voices, and
     dark forms were seen springing up from among the bleached grass,
     and from under the shade, and many eyes were directed at the
     whitened hill-slope.

     "'Yes; it is true! it is true! La il Allah, il Allah! Yes; el hamd
     ul Illah! Yes, it is food! food! food at last! Ah, that Uledi! he
     is a lion, truly! We are saved, thank God!'

     [Illustration: IN THE SUBURBS OF BOMA.]

     "Before many minutes, Uledi and KachÃ©chÃ© were seen tearing through
     the grass, and approaching us with long springing strides, holding
     a letter up to announce to us that they had been successful. And
     the gallant fellows, hurrying up, soon placed it in my hands, and
     in the hearing of all who were gathered to hear the news I
     translated the following letter:

  "'EMBOMMA,
  "'ENGLISH FACTORY.
  "'6.30 A.M.,
  "'BOMA, _6th August_, 1877.

      "'H. M. STANLEY, Esq.:

      "DEAR SIR,--Your welcome letter came to hand yesterday, at 7 P.M.
      As soon as its contents were understood, we immediately arranged
      to despatch to you such articles as you requested, as much as our
      stock on hand would permit, and other things that we deemed would
      be suitable in that locality. You will see that we send fifty
      pieces of cloth, each twenty-four yards long, and some sacks
      containing sundries for yourself; several sacks of rice, sweet
      potatoes, also a few bundles of fish, a bundle of tobacco, and one
      demijohn of rum. The carriers are all paid, so that you need not
      trouble yourself about them. That is all we need say about
      business. We are exceedingly sorry to hear that you have arrived
      in such piteous condition, but we send our warmest congratulations
      to you, and hope that you will soon arrive in Boma (this place is
      called Boma by us, though on the map it is Embomma). Again hoping
      that you will soon arrive, and that you are not suffering in
      health.

      "'Believe us to remain, your sincere friends,

  "'_(Signed)_
  "'HATTON & COOKSON.
  "'A. DA MOTTA VEIGA.
  "'J. W. HARRISON.'

      [Illustration: OUTBUILDINGS OF AN AFRICAN FACTORY.]

      "Uledi and KachÃ©chÃ© then delivered their budget. Their guides had
      accompanied them half-way, when they became frightened by the
      menaces of some of the natives of Mbinda, and deserted them. The
      four Wangwana, however, undertook the journey alone, and,
      following a road for several hours, they appeared at Bibbi after
      dark. The next day (the 5th), being told by the natives that Boma
      (to which Embomma was now changed) was lower down river, and
      unable to obtain guides, the brave fellows resolved upon following
      the Congo along its banks. About an hour after sunset, after a
      fatiguing march over many hills, they reached Boma, and, asking a
      native for the house of the 'Ingreza' (English), were shown to the
      factory of Messrs. Hatton & Cookson, which was superintended by a
      Portuguese gentleman, Mr. A. da Motta Veiga, and Mr. John W.
      Harrison, of Liverpool. KachÃ©chÃ©, who was a better narrator than
      Uledi, then related that a short white man, wearing spectacles,
      opened the letter, and, after reading awhile, asked which was
      Robert Feruzi, who answered for himself in English, and, in answer
      to many questions, gave a summary of our travels and adventures,
      but not before the cooks were set to prepare an abundance of food,
      which they sadly needed, after a fast of over thirty hours.

      [Illustration: ESCORT OF THE CARAVAN.]

      "By this time the procession of carriers from Messrs. Hatton &
      Cookson's factory had approached, and all eyes were directed at
      the pompous old 'capitan' and the relief caravan behind him.
      Several of the Wangwana officiously stepped forward to relieve the
      fatigued and perspiring men, and with an extraordinary vigor
      tossed the provisions--rice, fish, and tobacco bundles--on the
      ground, except the demijohn of rum, which they called pombÃ©, and
      handled most carefully. The 'capitan' was anxious about my private
      stores, but the scene transpiring about the provisions was so
      absorbingly interesting that I could pay no attention as yet to
      them. While the captains of the messes were ripping open the sacks
      and distributing the provisions in equal quantities, Murabo, the
      boat-boy, struck up a glorious, loud-swelling chant of triumph and
      success, into which he deftly, and with a poet's license,
      interpolated verses laudatory of the white men of the second sea.
      The bard, extemporizing, sang much about the great cataracts,
      cannibals, and pagans, hunger, the wide wastes, great inland seas,
      and niggardly tribes, and wound up by declaring that the journey
      was over, that we were even then smelling the breezes of the
      western ocean, and his master's brothers had redeemed them from
      the 'hell of hunger.' And at the end of each verse the voices rose
      high and clear to the chorus--

  "'Then sing, O friends, sing; the journey is ended;
  Sing aloud, O friends, sing to this great sea.'

      "'Enough now; fall to,' said Manwa Sera, at which the people
      nearly smothered him by their numbers. Into each apron, bowl, and
      utensil held out, the several captains expeditiously tossed full
      measures of rice and generous quantities of sweet potatoes and
      portions of fish. The younger men and women hobbled after water,
      and others set about gathering fuel, and the camp was all
      animation, where but half an hour previously all had been listless
      despair. Many people were unable to wait for the food to be
      cooked, but ate the rice and the fish raw. But when the provisions
      had all been distributed, and the noggin of rum had been equitably
      poured into each man's cup, and the camp was in a state of genial
      excitement, and groups of dark figures discussed with animation
      the prospective food which the hospitable fires were fast
      preparing, then I turned to my tent, accompanied by Uledi,
      KachÃ©chÃ©, the capitan, and the tent-boys, who were, I suppose,
      eager to witness my transports of delight.

      "With profound tenderness KachÃ©chÃ© handed to me the mysterious
      bottles, watching my face the while with his sharp detective eyes
      as I glanced at the labels, by which the cunning rogue read my
      pleasure. Pale ale! Sherry! Port wine! Champagne! Several loaves
      of bread, wheaten bread, sufficient for a week! Two pots of
      butter! A packet of tea! Coffee! White loaf-sugar! Sardines and
      salmon! Plum-pudding! Currant, gooseberry, and raspberry jam!

      "The gracious God be praised forever! The long war we had
      maintained against famine and the siege of woe were over, and my
      people and I rejoiced in plenty! Only an hour before this we had
      been living on the recollections of the few peanuts and green
      bananas we had consumed in the morning, but now, in an instant, we
      were transported into the presence of the luxuries of
      civilization. Never did gaunt Africa appear so unworthy and so
      despicable before my eyes as now, when imperial Europe rose before
      me and showed her boundless treasures of life, and blessed me with
      her stores.

      "When we all felt refreshed, the cloth bales were opened, and
      soon, instead of the venerable and tattered relics of Manchester,
      Salem, and Nashua manufacture, which were hastily consumed by the
      fire, the people were reclad with white cloths and gay prints. The
      nakedness of want, the bare ribs, the sharp, protruding bones were
      thus covered; but months must elapse before the hollow, sunken
      cheeks and haggard faces would again resume the healthy bronze
      color which distinguishes the well-fed African.

      [Illustration: OUTSIDE THE VILLAGE.]

      "My condition of mind in the evening of the eventful day which was
      signalized by the happy union which we had made with the merchants
      of the west coast, may be guessed by the following letter:

  "'BANZA MBUKO, _August_ 6, 1877.

      "'MESSRS. A. DA MOTTA VEIGA AND J. W. HARRISON, EMBOMMA, CONGO
      RIVER:

      "'GENTLEMEN,--I have received your very welcome letter, but better
      than all, and more welcome, your supplies. I am unable to express
      just at present how grateful I feel. We are all so overjoyed and
      confused with our emotions, at the sight of the stores exposed to
      our hungry eyes--at the sight of the rice, the fish, and the rum,
      and for me--wheaten bread, butter, sardines, jam, peaches, grapes,
      beer (ye gods! just think of it--three bottles pale ale!) besides
      tea and sugar--that we cannot restrain ourselves from falling to
      and enjoying this sudden bounteous store--and I beg you will
      charge our apparent want of thankfulness to our greediness. If we
      do not thank you sufficiently in words, rest assured we feel what
      volumes could not describe.

      "'For the next twenty-four hours we shall be too busy eating to
      think of anything else much; but I may say that the people cry out
      joyfully, while their mouths are full of rice and fish, "Verily,
      our master has found the sea, and his brothers, but we did not
      believe him until he showed us the rice and the pombÃ© (rum). We
      did not believe there was any end to the great river; but, God be
      praised forever, we shall see white people to-morrow, and our wars
      and troubles will be over."

      "'Dear Sirs, though strangers, I feel we shall be great friends,
      and it will be the study of my lifetime to remember my feelings of
      gratefulness when I first caught sight of your supplies, and my
      poor, faithful, and brave people cried out, "Master, we are
      saved!--food is coming!" The old and the young--the men, the
      women, the children--lifted their wearied and worn-out frames, and
      began to chant lustily an extemporaneous song, in honor of the
      white people by the great salt sea (the Atlantic) who had listened
      to their prayers. I had to rush to my tent to hide the tears that
      would issue, despite all my attempts at composure.

      "'Gentlemen, that the blessing of God may attend your footsteps
      whithersoever you go, is the very earnest prayer of

  "'Yours faithfully, HENRY M. STANLEY,
  "'_Commanding Anglo-American Expedition_.'

      "At the same hour on the morning of the 7th that we resumed the
      march, KachÃ©chÃ© and Uledi were despatched to Boma with the above
      letter. Then surmounting a ridge, we beheld a grassy country
      barred with seams of red clay in gullies, ravines, and slopes, the
      effects of rain, dipping into basins with frequently broad masses
      of plateau and great dykelike ridges between, and in the distance
      southwest of us a lofty, tree-clad hill-range, which we were told
      we should have to climb before descending to N'lamba N'lamba,
      where we proposed camping.

      [Illustration: VIEW IN THE OPEN COUNTRY.]

      "Half an hour's march brought us to a market-place, where a
      tragedy had been enacted a short time before the relief caravan
      had passed it the day previous. Two thieves had robbed a woman of
      salt, and, according to the local custom which ordains the
      severest penalties for theft in the public mart, the two felons
      had been immediately executed, and their bodies laid close to the
      path to deter others evilly disposed from committing like crimes.

      "At noon we surmounted the lofty range which we had viewed near
      Banza Mbuko, and the aneroid indicated a height of fifteen hundred
      feet. A short distance from its base, on two grassy hills, is
      situate N'lamba N'lamba, a settlement comprising several villages,
      and as populous as Mbinda. The houses and streets were very clean
      and neat; but, as of old, the natives are devoted to idolatry, and
      their passion for carving wooden idols was illustrated in every
      street we passed through.

      "On the 8th we made a short march of five miles to N'safu, over a
      sterile, bare, and hilly country, but the highest ridge passed was
      not over eleven hundred feet above the sea. Uledi and KachÃ©chÃ©
      returned at this place with more cheer for us, and a note
      acknowledging my letter of thanks.

      "In a postscript to this note, Mr. Motta Veiga prepared me for a
      reception which was to meet me on the road half-way between N'safu
      and Boma; it also contained the census of the European population,
      as follows:

      "'Perhaps you do not know that in Boma there are only eleven
      Portuguese, one Frenchman, one Dutchman, one gentleman from St.
      Helena, and ourselves (Messrs. Motta Veiga and J. W. Harrison),
      Messrs. Hatton and Cookson being in Liverpool, and the two
      signatures above being names of those in charge of the English
      factory there.'

      "On the 9th of August, 1877, 999th day from the date of our
      departure from Zanzibar, we prepared to greet the van of
      civilization.

      "From the bare rocky ridges of N'safu there is a perceptible
      decline to the Congo valley, and the country becomes, in
      appearance, more sterile--a sparse population dwelling in a mere
      skeleton village in the centre of bleakness. Shingly rocks strewed
      the path and the waste, and thin, sere grass waved mournfully on
      level and spine, on slope of ridge and crest of hill; in the
      hollows it was somewhat thicker; in the bottoms it had a slight
      tinge of green.

      "We had gradually descended some five hundred feet along declining
      spurs when we saw a scattered string of hammocks appearing, and
      gleams of startling whiteness, such as were given by fine linen
      and twills.

      "A buzz of wonder ran along our column.

      "Proceeding a little farther, we stopped, and in a short time I
      was face to face with four white--ay, truly white men!

      "As I looked into their faces, I blushed to find that I was
      wondering at their paleness. Poor pagan Africans--Rwoma of Uzinja,
      and man-eating tribes of the Livingstone! The whole secret of
      their wonder and curiosity flashed upon me at once. What arrested
      the twanging bow and the deadly trigger of the cannibals? What but
      the weird pallor of myself and Frank! In the same manner the sight
      of the pale faces of the Embomma merchants gave me the slightest
      suspicion of an involuntary shiver. The pale color, after so long
      gazing on rich black and richer bronze, had something of an
      unaccountable ghastliness. I could not divest myself of the
      feeling that they must be sick; yet, as I compare their
      complexions to what I now view, I should say they were olive,
      sunburned, dark.

      [Illustration: WOODEN IDOL.]

      "Yet there was something very self-possessed about the carriage of
      these white men. It was grand; a little self-pride mixed with
      cordiality. I could not remember just then that I had witnessed
      such bearing among any tribe throughout Africa. They spoke well
      also; the words they uttered hit the sense pat; without gesture,
      they were perfectly intelligible. How strange! It was quite
      delightful to observe the slight nods of the head; the intelligent
      facial movements were admirably expressive. They were completely
      clothed, and neat also; I ought to say immaculately clean. Jaunty
      straw hats, colored neckties, patent-leather boots, well-cut
      white clothes, virtuously clean! I looked from them to my people,
      and then I fear I felt almost like being grateful to the Creator
      that I was not as black as they, and that these finely dressed,
      well-spoken whites claimed me as friend and kin. Yet I did not
      dare to place myself upon an equality with them as yet; the calm
      blue and gray eyes rather awed me, and the immaculate purity of
      their clothes dazzled me. I was content to suppose myself a kind
      of connecting link between the white and the African for the time
      being. Possibly familiarity would beget greater confidence.

      [Illustration: THE WHITE-FRONTED WILD HOG OF CENTRAL AFRICA.]

      "They expressed themselves delighted to see me; congratulated me
      with great warmth of feeling, and offered to me the 'Freedom of
      Boma!' We travelled together along the path for a mile, and came
      to the frontier village of Boma, or Embomma, where the 'king' was
      at hand to do the honors. My courteous friends had brought a
      hamper containing luxuries. Hock and champagne appeared to be
      cheap enough where but a few hours previous a cup of palm-wine was
      as precious as nectar; rare dainties of Paris and London abundant,
      though a short time ago we were stinted of even ground-nuts. Nor
      were the Wangwana forgotten, for plenty had also been prepared for
      them.

      [Illustration: THE HAMMOCK ON THE WEST COAST OF AFRICA.]

      "My friends who thus welcomed me among the descendants of Japhet
      were Mr. A. da Motta Veiga, Senhores Luiz Pinto Maroo, JoÃ£o
      Chaves, Henrique Germano Faro, and Mr. J. F. MÃ¼ller, of the Dutch
      factory. They had brought a hammock with them, and eight sturdy,
      well-fed bearers. They insisted on my permitting them to lift me
      into the hammock. I declined. They said it was a Portuguese
      custom. To custom, therefore, I yielded, though it appeared very
      effeminate.

      [Illustration: THE CIRCUMNAVIGATORS OF THE VICTORIA NYANZA AND
      LAKE TANGANIKA, AND EXPLORERS OF THE ALEXANDRA NILE AND
      LIVINGSTONE (CONGO) RIVER.]

      "It was a gradual slope through a valley, which soon opened into a
      low alluvial plain, seamed here and there with narrow gullies, and
      then over the heads of the tall grass as I lay in the hammock I
      caught a glimpse of the tall square box of a frame-house, with a
      steep roof, erected on rising ground. It brought back a host of
      old recollections; for everywhere on the frontiers of civilization
      in America one may see the like. It approached nearer and larger
      to the view, and presently the hammock was halted by whitewashed
      palings, above which the square two-storied box rose on piles with
      a strangeness that was almost weird. It was the residence of those
      in charge of the English factory.

      [Illustration: NATIVE BELLES ON THE WEST COAST.]

      "Looking from the house, my eyes rested on the river. Ah! the
      hateful, murderous river, now so broad and proud and majestically
      calm, as though it had not bereft me of a friend, and of many
      faithful souls, and as though we had never heard it rage and
      whiten with fury, and mock the thunder. What a hypocritical river!
      But just below the landing a steamer was ascending--the _Kabinda_,
      John Petherbridge, master. How civilization was advancing on me!
      Not a moment even to lie down and rest! Full-blooded, eager,
      restless, and aggressive, it pressed on me, and claimed me for its
      own, without allowing me even the time to cast one retrospective
      glance at the horrors left behind. While still overwhelmed by the
      thought, the people of the expedition appeared, pressing forward
      to admire and gaze wide-eyed at the strange 'big iron canoe,'
      driven by fire on _their_ river; for there were several
      Wanyamwezi, Waganda, and east-coast men who would not believe that
      there was anything more wonderful than the _Lady Alice_.

      "Our life at Boma, which lasted only from 11 A.M. of the 9th to
      noon of the 11th, passed too quickly away; but throughout it was
      intensest pleasure and gayety.

      [Illustration: NATIVE BLACKSMITHS NEAR BOMA.]

      "There are some half-dozen factories at Boma, engaging the
      attention of about eighteen whites. The houses are all constructed
      of wooden boards, with, as a rule, corrugated zinc roofs. The
      residences line the river front; the Dutch, French, and Portuguese
      factories being west of an isolated high square-browed hill,
      which, by-the-bye, is a capital site for a fortlet; and the
      English factory being a few hundred yards above it. Each factory
      requires an ample courtyard for its business, which consists in
      the barter of cotton fabrics, glass-ware, crockery, iron-ware,
      gin, rum, guns and gunpowder, for palm-oil, ground-nuts, and
      ivory. The merchants contrive to exist as comfortably as their
      means will allow. Some of them plant fruits and garden vegetables,
      and cultivate grape-vines. Pineapples, guavas, and limes may be
      obtained from the market, which is held on alternate days a short
      distance behind the European settlement.

      "Though Boma is comparatively ancient, and Europeans have had
      commercial connections with this district and the people for over
      a century, yet Captain Tuckey's description of the people,
      written in 1816--their ceremonies and modes of life, their
      suspicion of strangers and intolerance, their greed for rum and
      indolence, the scarcity of food--is as correct as though written
      to-day. The name 'Boma,' however, has usurped that of 'Lombee,'
      which Captain Tuckey knew; the _banza_ of Embomma being a little
      distance inland. In his day it was a village of about one hundred
      huts, in which was held the market of the _banza_, or king's town.

      "The view inland is dreary, bleak, and unpromising, consisting of
      grassy hills, and of a broken country, its only boast the sturdy
      baobab, which relieves the nakedness of the land. But, fresh from
      the hungry wilderness and the land of selfish men, from the storm
      and stress of the cataracts, the solemn rock defiles of the
      Livingstone, and the bleak table-land--I heeded it not. The
      glowing, warm life of Western civilization, the hospitable
      civilities and gracious kindnesses which the merchants of Boma
      showered on myself and people, were as dews of Paradise, grateful,
      soothing, and refreshing.

      "On the 11th, at noon, after a last little banquet and songs,
      hearty cheers, innumerable toasts, and fervid claspings of
      friendly hands, we embarked. An hour before sunset the 'big iron
      canoe,' after a descent of about thirty-five miles, hauled
      in-shore, on the right bank, and made fast to the pier of another
      of Hatton & Cookson's factories at Ponta da Lenha, or Wooded
      Point. Two or three other Portuguese factories are in close
      neighborhood to it, lightening the gloom of the background of
      black mangrove and forest.

      "After a very agreeable night with our hospitable English host,
      the _Kabinda_ was again under way.

      "The puissant river below Boma reminded me of the scenes above
      Uyanzi; the color of the water, the numerous islands, and the
      enormous breadth recalled those days when we had sought the liquid
      wildernesses of the Livingstone, to avoid incessant conflicts with
      the human beasts of prey in the midst of primitive Africa, and at
      the sight my eyes filled with tears at the thought that I could
      not recall my lost friends, and bid them share the rapturous joy
      that now filled the hearts of all those who had endured and
      survived.

      "A few hours later and we were gliding through the broad portal
      into the ocean, the blue domain of civilization!

      "Turning to take a farewell glance at the mighty river on whose
      brown bosom we had endured so greatly, I saw it approach, awed and
      humbled, the threshold of the watery immensity, to whose
      immeasurable volume and illimitable expanse, awful as had been its
      power, and terrible as had been its fury, its flood was but a
      drop. And I felt my heart suffused with purest gratitude to Him
      whose hand had protected us, and who had enabled us to pierce the
      Dark Continent from east to west, and to trace its mightiest river
      to its ocean bourne."




CHAPTER XVIII.

ARRIVAL AT KABINDA.--WEST AFRICAN MERCHANTS.--DEATH AMONG THE
WANGWANA.--ILLNESS AMONG THE PEOPLE OF THE EXPEDITION.--STANLEY'S
ANXIETY FOR HIS FOLLOWERS.--THEIR FAILING HEALTH.--ENCOURAGING THEM WITH
WORDS AND KIND TREATMENT.--THE BANE OF IDLENESS.--LEAVING KABINDA.--SAN
PAULO DE LOANDA.--KINDNESS OF THE PORTUGUESE OFFICIALS.--H. B. MAJESTY'S
SHIP _INDUSTRY_.--CARRIED TO THE CAPE OF GOOD HOPE.--THE WANGWANA SEE A
"FIRE-CARRIAGE."--TO NATAL AND ZANZIBAR.--RECEPTION.--DISBANDING THE
EXPEDITION.--AFFECTING SCENES.--STANLEY'S TRIBUTE TO HIS FOLLOWERS.


[Illustration: AT REST: STANLEY'S QUARTERS AT KABINDA BY THE SEA.]

     "After steaming northward from the mouth of the Congo for a few
     hours, we entered the fine bay of Kabinda, on the southern shores
     of which the native town of that name in the country of Ngoyo is
     situate. On the southern point of the bay stands a third factory of
     the enterprising firm of Messrs. Hatton & Cookson, under the
     immediate charge of their principal agent, Mr. John Phillips. A
     glance at the annexed photograph will sufficiently show the
     prosperous appearance of the establishment, and the comfortable
     houses that have been constructed. The expedition received a
     cordial welcome from Messrs. Phillips, Wills, Price, and Jones, and
     I was housed in a cottage surrounded by gardens and overlooking
     the glorious sea, while the people were located in a large shed
     fronting the bay.

     [Illustration: EXPEDITION AT KABINDA.

     (_From a Photograph by Mr. Phillips._)]

     "The next morning when I proceeded to greet the people, I
     discovered that one of the Wangwana had died at sunrise; and when I
     examined the condition of the other sufferers it became apparent
     that there was to be yet no rest for me, and that, to save life, I
     should have to be assiduous and watchful. But for this, I should
     have surrendered myself to the joys of life, without a thought for
     myself or for others, and no doubt I should have suffered in the
     same degree as the Wangwana from the effects of the sudden
     relaxation from care, trouble, or necessity for further effort.
     There were also other claims on my energies: I had to write my
     despatches to the journals, and to re-establish those bonds of
     friendship and sympathetic communion that had been severed by the
     lapse of dark years and long months of silence. My poor people,
     however, had no such incentives to rouse themselves from the stupor
     of indifference, as fatal to them as the cold to a benighted man in
     a snowy wilderness. Housed together in a comfortable, barrack-like
     building, with every convenience provided for them, and supplied
     with food, raiment, fuel, water, and an excess of luxuries, nothing
     remained for them to do; and the consequence was, that the abrupt
     dead-stop to all action and movement overwhelmed them, and plunged
     them into a state of torpid brooding from which it was difficult to
     arouse them.

     "The words of the poet--

  "'What's won is done: Joy's soul lies in the doing--'

     "or, as Longfellow has it--

  "'The reward is in the doing,
  And the rapture of pursuing
  Is the prize'--

      "recurred to me, as explaining why it was that the people
      abandoned themselves to the dangerous melancholy created by
      inactivity. I was charmed by it myself; the senses were fast
      relapsing into a drowsy state, that appeared to be akin to the
      drowsiness of delirium. No novel or romance interested me, though
      Mr. Phillips's cottage possessed a complete library of fiction and
      light reading. Dickens seemed rubbish, and the finest poems flat.
      Frequently, even at meals, I found myself subsiding into sleep,
      though I struggled against it heroically; wine had no charm for
      me; conversation fatigued me. Yet the love of society, and what
      was due to my friendly hosts, acted as a wholesome restraint and a
      healthy stimulant; but what had the poor, untutored black
      strangers, whose homes were on the east side of the continent, to
      rouse them and to stimulate them into life?

      [Illustration: GROUP OF MR. STANLEY'S FOLLOWERS AT KABINA, WEST
      COAST OF AFRICA, JUST AFTER CROSSING THE "DARK CONTINENT."

      (_From a Photograph by Mr. Phillips, of Kabinda._)]

      "'Do you wish to see Zanzibar, boys?' I asked.

      "'Ah, it is far. Nay, speak not, master. We shall never see it,'
      they replied.

      "'But you will die if you go on in this way. Wake up--shake
      yourselves--show yourselves to be men.'

      "'Can a man contend with God? Who fears death? Let us die
      undisturbed, and be at rest forever,' they answered.

      [Illustration: SCENERY ON THE WEST COAST OF AFRICA.]

      "Brave, faithful, loyal souls! They were, poor fellows,
      surrendering themselves to the benumbing influences of a
      listlessness and fatal indifference to life! Four of them died in
      consequence of this strange malady at Loanda, three more on board
      H.M.S. _Industry_, and one woman breathed her last the day after
      we arrived at Zanzibar. But in their sad death they had one
      consolation, in the words which they kept constantly repeating to
      themselves:

      "'We have brought our master to the great sea, and he has seen his
      white brothers, La il Allah, il Allah! There is no God but God!'
      they said--and died.

      "It is not without an overwhelming sense of grief, a choking in
      the throat, and swimming eyes, that I write of those days, for my
      memory is still busy with the worth and virtues of the dead. In a
      thousand fields of incident, adventure, and bitter trials they had
      proved their stanch heroism and their fortitude; they had lived
      and endured nobly. I remember the enthusiasm with which they
      responded to my appeals; I remember their bold bearing during the
      darkest days; I remember the Spartan pluck, the indomitable
      courage with which they suffered in the days of our adversity.
      Their voices again loyally answer me, and again I hear them
      address each other upon the necessity of standing by the 'master.'
      Their boat-song, which contained sentiments similar to the
      following--

  "'The pale-faced stranger, lonely here,
  In cities afar, where his name is dear,
  Your Arab truth and strength shall show;
  He trusts in us, row, Arabs, row--

      "despite all the sounds which now surround me, still charms my
      listening ear.

      [Illustration: A DANDY OF SAN PAULO DE LOANDA.]

      "The expedition, after a stay of eight days at Kabinda, was kindly
      taken on board the Portuguese gunboat _TamÃ©ga_, Commander JosÃ©
      Marquez, to San Paulo de Loanda. The Portuguese officers
      distinguished themselves by a superb banquet, and an exhibition of
      extraordinary courtesy towards myself, and great sympathy towards
      my followers. Two gentlemen, Major Serpa Pinto and Senhor JosÃ©
      Avelino Fernandez, who were on board, extended their hospitalities
      so far as to persuade me to accompany them to their residence in
      the capital of Angola. To house the one hundred and fourteen
      Wangwana who accompanied me was a great task on the liberality of
      these gentlemen, but the Portuguese Governor-General of Angola
      nobly released them and myself from all obligations, and all the
      expenses incurred by us from the 21st of August to the 27th of
      September were borne by the colony. One of the first acts of
      Governor-General Albuquerque was to despatch his aide-de-camp with
      offers of assistance, money, and a gunboat to convey me to Lisbon,
      which received, as it deserved, my warmest thanks. The Portuguese
      commodore gave a banquet to the Portuguese explorers. Major Serpa
      Pinto, Commander Brito Capello, and Lieutenant Roberto Ivens, who
      were about setting out for the exploration of the KunenÃ© or NoursÃ©
      River, as far as BihÃ©, thence to Lake Nyassa and Mozambique, and
      upon the festive occasion they honored me. The Board of Works at
      Loanda also banqueted us royally; as also did Mr. Michael Tobin,
      the banker, while Mr. Hubert Newton was unceasing in his
      hospitalities.

      "The government hospital at Luanda was open to the sick strangers;
      Doctor Lopez and his assistants daily visited the sick-ward of
      our residence, and a trained nurse was detailed to attend the
      suffering. Pure Samaritanism animated the enthusiastic Senhor
      Capello, and free, unselfish charity inspired my friend Avelino
      Fernandez to watch and tend the ailing, desponding, and exhausted
      travellers.

      "Nor must the English officers of the Royal Navy be forgotten for
      their chivalrous kindness. When I was wondering whether I should
      be compelled to lead the Wangwana across the continent to their
      homes, they solved my doubts and anxieties by offering the
      expedition a passage to Cape Town in H.M.S. _Industry_. The offer
      of the Portuguese governor-general to convey me in a gunboat to
      Lisbon, and the regular arrivals of the Portuguese mail steamers,
      were very tempting, but the condition of my followers was such
      that I found it impossible to leave them.

      "The cordial civilities that were accorded to us at Loanda were
      succeeded by equally courteous treatment on board the _Industry_.
      Her officers, Captain Dyer, Assistant-Surgeon William Brown, and
      Paymaster Edwin Sandys, assisted me to the utmost of their ability
      in alleviating the sufferings of the sick and reviving the vigor
      of the desponding. But the accomplished surgeon found his patients
      most difficult cases. The flame of life flickered and spluttered,
      and to fan it into brightness required in most of the cases
      patience and tact more than medicine. Yet there was a little
      improvement in them, though they were still heavy-eyed.

      "Upon arriving at Simon's Bay, Cape of Good Hope, on the 21st of
      October, I was agreeably surprised by a most genial letter, signed
      by Commodore Francis William Sullivan, who invited me to the
      Admiralty House as his guest, and from whom during the entire
      period of our stay at the Cape we met with the most hearty
      courtesy and hospitality. He had also made preparations for
      transporting the expedition to Zanzibar, when a telegram from the
      Lords of the British Admiralty was received, authorizing him to
      provide for the transmission of my followers to their homes, an
      act of gracious kindness for which I have recorded elsewhere my
      most sincere thanks.

      "Had we been able to accept all the invitations that were showered
      upon us by the kind-hearted colonists of South Africa, from Cape
      Town to Natal, it is possible we might still be enjoying our
      holiday at that remote end of Africa, but her Majesty's ship could
      not be delayed for our pleasure and gratification. But during the
      time she was refitting, the authorities of Cape Town and
      Stellenbosch, through the influence of Lady Frere, Commodore
      Sullivan, and Captain Mills, Colonial Secretary, exerted
      themselves so zealously to gratify and honor us, that I attribute
      a large share of the recovery in health of my followers to the
      cordial and unmistakable heartiness of the hospitalities they
      there enjoyed. Here the Wangwana saw for the first time the
      'fire-carriage,' and, accompanied by Commodore Sullivan, the Dean
      of Cape Town, and several of the leading residents of the Cape,
      the expedition was whirled to Stellenbosch at the rate of thirty
      miles an hour, which, of all the wonders they had viewed, seemed
      to them the most signal example of the wonderful enterprise and
      superior intelligence of the European.

      "I ought not to omit describing a little episode that occurred
      soon after our arrival in Simon's Bay. For the first three days
      after landing at Simon's Town, blustering gales prevented me from
      returning to the ship. The people thereupon became anxious, and
      wondered whether this distant port was to terminate my connection
      with them. On returning to the ship, therefore, I found them even
      more melancholy than when I had left them. I asked the reason.

      [Illustration: VIEW OF SAN PAULO DE LOANDA--THE FORT OF SAN MIGUEL
      ON THE RIGHT.]

      "'You will return to Ulyah' (Europe), 'of course, now.'

      "'Why?'

      "'Oh, do we not see that you have met your friends, and all these
      days we have felt that you will shortly leave us?'

      "'Who told you so?' I asked, smiling at the bitterness visible in
      their faces.

      "'Our hearts; and they are very heavy.'

      "'Ah! and would it please you if I accompanied you to Zanzibar?'

      "'Why should you ask, master? Are you not our father?'

      "'Well, it takes a long time to teach you to rely upon the promise
      of your father. I have told you, over and over again, that nothing
      shall cause me to break my promise to you that I would take you
      home. You have been true to me, and I shall be true to you. If we
      can get no ship to take us, I will walk the entire distance with
      you until I can show you to your friends at Zanzibar.'

      "'Now we are grateful, master.'

      [Illustration: DHOWS IN THE HARBOR OF ZANZIBAR.]

      "I observed no sad faces after this day, and Captain Dyer and his
      officers noticed how they visibly improved and brightened up from
      this time.

      "On the 6th of November H.M.S. _Industry_ was equipped and ready
      for her voyage to Zanzibar. On the twelfth of the month she
      dropped anchor in the harbor of Natal to coal, and fourteen days
      after her departure from Natal the palmy island of Zanzibar rose
      into sight, and in the afternoon we were bearing straight for
      port.

      [Illustration: THE RECUPERATED AND RECLAD EXPEDITION AS IT
      APPEARED AT ADMIRALTY HOUSE, SIMON'S TOWN, AFTER OUR ARRIVAL ON
      H.M.S. "INDUSTRY."]

      "As I looked on the Wangwana, and saw the pleasure which now
      filled every soul, I felt myself amply rewarded for sacrificing
      several months to see them home. The sick had, all but one,
      recovered, and they had improved so much in appearance that few,
      ignorant of what they had been, could have supposed that these
      were the living skeletons that had reeled from sheer weakness
      through Boma.

      "The only patient who had baffled our endeavors to restore her to
      health was the woman Muscati, unfortunate Safeni's wife. Singular
      to relate, she lived to be embraced by her father, and the next
      morning died in his arms, surrounded by her relatives and friends.
      But all the others were blessed with redundant health--robust,
      bright, and happy.

      "And now the well-known bays and inlets, and spicy shores and
      red-tinted bluffs of Mbwenni enraptured them. Again they saw what
      they had often despaired of seeing: the rising ridge of Wilezu, at
      the foot of which they knew were their homes and their tiny
      gardens; the well-known features of Shangani and Melindi; the tall
      square mass of the sultan's palace. Each outline, each house, from
      the Sandy Point to their own Ngambu, each well-remembered bold
      swell of land, with its glories of palm and mango-tree, was to
      them replete with associations of bygone times.

      "The captain did not detain them on board. The boats were all
      lowered at once, and they crowded the gangway and ladder. I
      watched the first boat-load.

      "To those on the beach it was a surprise to see so many
      white-shirted, turbaned men making for shore from an English
      man-of-war. Were they slaves--or what? No; slaves they could not
      be, for they were too well dressed. Yet what could they be?

      "The boat-keel kissed the beach, and the impatient fellows leaped
      out and upward, and danced in ecstasy on the sands of their
      island; they then kneeled down, bowed their faces to the dear
      soil, and cried out, with emotion, their thanks to Allah! To the
      full they now taste the sweetness of the return home. The glad
      tidings ring out along the beach, 'It is Bwana Stanley's
      expedition that has returned.'

      "Then came bounding towards them their friends, acquaintances,
      countrymen, asking ever so many questions, all burning to know all
      about it. Where had they been? How came they to be on board the
      man-of-war? What had they seen? Who was dead? Where is So-and-so?
      You have gone beyond NyangwÃ© to the other sea? Mashallah!

      "The boats come and go.

      "More of the returned braves land, jump and frisk about, shake
      hands, embrace firmly and closely; they literally _leap_ into each
      other's arms, and there are many wet eyes there, for some terrible
      tales are told of death, disaster, and woe by the most voluble of
      the narrators, who seem to think it incumbent on them to tell all
      the news at once. The minor details, which are a thousand and a
      thousand, shall be told to-morrow and the next day, and the next,
      and for days and years to come.

      "The ship was soon emptied of her strange passengers. Captain
      Sullivan, of the _London_, came on board, and congratulated me on
      my safe arrival, and then I went on shore to my friend Mr.
      Augustus Sparhawk's house. We will pass over whatever may have
      transpired among the reunited friends, relatives, acquaintances,
      etc., but I will give substantially what Mabruki, a stout,
      bright-eyed lad, the Nestor of the youths during the expedition,
      related of his experiences the next day.

      "'Well, Mabruki, tell me, did you see your mother?' Mabruki,
      knowing I have a lively curiosity to know all about the meeting,
      because he had been sometimes inclined to despair of seeing poor
      old 'mamma' again, relaxes the severe tightness of his face, and
      out of his eyes there gushes such a flood of light as shows him to
      be brimful of happiness, and he hastens to answer, with a slight
      bob of the head,

      "'Yes, master.'

      "'Is she quite well? How does she look? What did she say when she
      saw her son such a great strong lad? Come, tell me all about it.'

      "'I will tell you--but ah! she is old now. She did not know me at
      first, because I burst open the door of our house, and I was one
      of the foremost to land, and I ran all the way from the boat to
      the house. She was sitting talking with a friend. When the door
      opened she cried out, "Who?"

      "'"Mi-mi, ma-ma. It is I, mother. It is I--Mabruki, mother. It is
      I, returned from the continent."

      "'"What! Mabruki, my son!"

      "'"Verily it is I, mother."

      "'She could scarcely believe I had returned, for she had heard no
      news. But soon all the women round about gathered together near
      the door, while the house was full to hear the news; and they were
      all crying and laughing and talking so fast, which they kept up
      far into the night. She is very proud of me, master. When the
      dinner was ready over twenty sat down to share with us. "Oh!" they
      all said, "you are a man indeed, now that you have been farther
      than any Arab has ever been."'

      "Four days of grace I permitted myself to procure the thousands of
      rupees required to pay off the people for their services. Messages
      had also been sent to the relatives of the dead, requesting them
      to appear at Mr. Sparhawk's, prepared to make their claims good by
      the mouths of three witnesses.

      "On the fifth morning the people--men, women, and children--of the
      Anglo-American Expedition, attended by hundreds of friends, who
      crowded the street and the capacious rooms of the Bertram Agency,
      began to receive their well-earned dues.

      "The women, thirteen in number, who had borne the fatigues of the
      long, long journey, who had transformed the stern camp in the
      depths of the wilds into something resembling a village in their
      own island, who had encouraged their husbands to continue in their
      fidelity despite all adversity, were all rewarded.

      "The children of the chiefs who had accompanied us from Zanzibar
      to the Atlantic, and who, by their childish, careless prattle, had
      often soothed me in mid-Africa, and had often caused me to forget
      my responsibilities for the time, were not forgotten. Neither
      were the tiny infants--ushered into the world amid the dismal and
      tragic scenes of the cataract lands, and who, with their eyes wide
      open with wonder, now crowed and crooned at the gathering of happy
      men and elated women about them--omitted in this final account and
      reckoning.

      "The second pay-day was devoted to hearing the claims for wages
      due to the faithful dead. Poor faithful souls! With an ardor and a
      fidelity unexpected, and an immeasurable confidence, they had
      followed me to the very death. True, negro nature had often
      asserted itself, but it was after all but human nature. They had
      never boasted that they were heroes, but they exhibited truly
      heroic stuff while coping with the varied terrors of the hitherto
      untrodden and apparently endless wilds of broad Africa.

      [Illustration:

      1. Wife of Murabo.
      2. Wife of Robert.
      3. Wife of Mana Koko.
      4. Half-caste of Ganbaragara, whom Wadi Rehani married.
      5. Zaidi's wife.
      6. Wife of Wadi Baraka.
      7. Wife of Manwa Sera.
      8. Wife of Chowpereh.
      9. Wife of Muini PembÃ©.
      10. Wife of Muscati.
      11. Wife of Chiwonda.
      12. Wife of Mufta.

      THE WOMEN OF THE EXPEDITION.]

      "The female relatives filed in. With each name of the dead, old
      griefs were remembered. The poignant sorrow I felt--as the fallen
      were named after each successive conflict in those dark days never
      to be forgotten by me--was revived. Sad and subdued were the faces
      of those I saw; as sad and subdued as my own feelings. With such
      sympathies between us we soon arrived at a satisfactory
      understanding. Each woman was paid without much explanation
      required--one witness was sufficient. There were men, however, who
      were put to great shifts. They appeared to have no identity. None
      of my own people would vouch for the relationship; no respectable
      man knew them. Several claimed money upon the ground that they
      were acquaintances; that they had been slaves under one master,
      and had become freemen together on their master's death. Parents
      and brothers were not difficult to identify. The settlement of the
      claims lasted five days, and then--the Anglo-American Expedition
      was no more.

      "On the 13th of December the British India Steam Navigation
      Company's steamer _Pachumba_ sailed from Zanzibar for Aden, on
      board which Mr. William Mackinnon had ordered a state-room for me.
      My followers through Africa had all left their homes early, that
      they might be certain to arrive in time to witness my departure.
      They were there now, every one of them arrayed in the picturesque
      dress of their countrymen. The fulness of the snowy dishdasheh and
      the amplitude of the turban gave a certain dignity to their forms,
      and each sported a light cane. Upon inquiring I ascertained that
      several had already purchased handsome little properties--houses
      and gardens--with their wages, proving that the long journey had
      brought, with its pains and rough experience, a good deal of
      thrift and wisdom.

      "When I was about to step into the boat, the brave, faithful
      fellows rushed before me and shot the boat into the sea, and then
      lifted me up on their heads and carried me through the surf into
      the boat.

      "We shook hands twenty times twenty, I think, and then at last the
      boat started.

      "I saw them consult together, and presently saw them run down the
      beach and seize a great twenty-ton lighter, which they soon manned
      and rowed after me. They followed me thus to the steamer, and a
      deputation of them came on board, headed by the famous Uledi, the
      coxswain; KachÃ©chÃ©, the chief detective; Robert, my indispensable
      factotum; Zaidi, the chief, and Wadi Rehani, the storekeeper, to
      inform me that they still considered me as their master, and that
      they would not leave Zanzibar until they received a letter from me
      announcing my safe arrival in my own country. I had, they said,
      taken them round all Africa to bring them back to their homes, and
      they must know that I had reached my own land before they would go
      to seek new adventures on the continent, and--simple, generous
      souls!--that if I wanted their help to reach my country they would
      help me!

      [Illustration: STANLEY, AS HE LEFT ENGLAND FOR AFRICA IN 1874.]

      "They were sweet and sad moments, those of parting. What a long,
      long and true friendship was here sundered! Through what strange
      vicissitudes of life had they not followed me! What wild and
      varied scenes had we not seen together! What a noble fidelity
      these untutored souls had exhibited! The chiefs were those who had
      followed me to Ujiji in 1871; they had been witnesses of the joy
      of Livingstone at the sight of me; they were the men to whom I
      intrusted the safeguard of Livingstone on his last and fatal
      journey, who had mourned by his corpse at Muilala, and borne the
      illustrious dead to the Indian Ocean.

      [Illustration: STANLEY, AS HE REACHED ZANZIBAR IN 1877.]

      "And in a flood of sudden recollection, all the stormy period here
      ended rushed in upon my mind; the whole panorama of danger and
      tempest through which these gallant fellows had so stanchly stood
      by me--these gallant fellows now parting from me. Rapidly, as in
      some apocalyptic vision, every scene of strife with man and nature
      through which these poor men and women had borne me company, and
      solaced me by the simple sympathy of common suffering, came
      hurrying across my memory; for each face before me was associated
      with some adventure or some peril, reminded me of some triumph or
      of some loss. What a wild, weird retrospect it was, that mind's
      flash over the troubled past! So like a troublous dream!

      "And for years and years to come, in many homes in Zanzibar, will
      be told the great story of our journey, and the actors in it will
      be heroes among their kith and kin. For me, too, they are heroes,
      these poor, ignorant children of Africa; for, from the first
      deadly struggle in savage Ituru to the last staggering rush into
      Embomma, they had rallied to my voice like veterans, and in the
      hour of need they had never failed me. And thus, aided by their
      willing hands and by their loyal hearts, the expedition had been
      successful, and the three great problems of the Dark Continent's
      geography had been fairly solved."

Fred paused and closed the book. The young gentleman's voice was husky;
in fact it had been so at several points in his reading, and there were
tears in his eyes as a natural accompaniment of the huskiness. He had
been compelled to stop two or three times while reading Mr. Stanley's
letter appealing "to any gentleman who speaks English at Embomma" to
send relief to his starving companions, and also when he read the
account of the arrival of the caravan with provisions for the suffering,
dying people. Fred's auditors were equally affected by this touching
narrative, and not one of them ventured to utter a word for fear he
should break down before completing a single sentence. For two or three
minutes no one moved or spoke. Finally Doctor Bronson made a remark that
"broke the ice," and the formalities of the occasion came to an end.

"That story of the suffering and relief in the last days of the journey
through the Dark Continent always brings tears to my eyes," said the
Doctor, as the party separated. "In Paris, in 1878, I was at a dinner
party at which Stanley was the principal guest. He was then fresh from
Africa, and when pressed to tell us something of his experience there he
gave the story which you have just heard. When he repeated the contents
of his letter, which he did from memory, and told of the prompt and
generous response to his appeal, every cheek at that table was wet, and
every one of the twenty or more men that composed the party pronounced
it the most affecting story he had ever heard."

And with this little incident the members of the _Eider_ Geographical
Society adjourned to the open air.




CHAPTER XIX.

THE LAST MEETING ON BOARD THE _EIDER_.--FOUNDING THE FREE STATE OF
CONGO.--MR. STANLEY'S LATER WORK ON THE GREAT RIVER.--BUILDING ROADS AND
ESTABLISHING STATIONS.--MAKING PEACE WITH THE NATIVES.--BULA
MATARI.--RESOURCES OF THE CONGO VALLEY.--STANLEY'S LATEST
BOOK.--STEAMERS ON THE RIVER.--THE CONGO RAILWAY.--STANLEY'S PRESENT
MISSION IN AFRICA.--EMIN PASHA AND HIS WORK.--HOW STANLEY PROPOSES TO
RELIEVE HIM.--DR. SCHNITZLER.--BEY OR PASHA?--MWANGA, KING OF
UGANDA.--HIS HOSTILITY TO WHITE MEN.--KILLING BISHOP HANNINGTON.--THE
EGYPTIAN EQUATORIAL PROVINCE.--LETTER FROM STANLEY.--HIS PLANS FOR THE
RELIEF EXPEDITION.--TIPPU-TIB AND HIS MEN.--FROM ZANZIBAR TO THE CONGO.


On the next day there was another meeting of the geographical society,
at which votes of thanks were given to Frank and Fred for their
successful effort to interest and amuse their fellow-voyagers. One of
the latter suggested that it would be a good plan to ask the author of
the "Boy Traveller Series" to make a book for young people by condensing
the two volumes of "Through the Dark Continent" into one, just as Frank
and Fred had condensed them for the readings they had given on board the
steamer. The suggestion was unanimously approved, and in compliance with
it this book has been prepared.

Doctor Bronson said they would be pleased to know that "Through the Dark
Continent" was simultaneously issued in nine languages, an honor never
before shown to a book on its first publication. One of the youths said
he believed Mr. Stanley had published another book about the Congo
country; he wished to know its title so that he could get a copy, as he
was sure it would be interesting.

"I'll tell you about that book," said the Doctor, "and why it was
written. While Mr. Stanley was making his journey which is described in
"Through the Dark Continent," an association was formed in Belgium for
the purpose of developing trade and pushing civilization in Africa. It
was under the patronage of Leopold II., King of the Belgians, and soon
after Mr. Stanley returned to Europe King Leopold engaged him to go to
Africa and manage the affairs of the International African Association,
as the new enterprise was called. He went to the Congo valley in 1879
and remained there nearly six years. He made two or three trips to
Europe during the period of his engagement, and one trip to Zanzibar;
with the exception of the time spent on these journeys, he was occupied
with personally supervising the work of developing trade and
civilization on the Congo."

[Illustration: NGAHMA, A CONGO CHIEF.]

"How did he do it?" was the very natural interrogatory that followed.

"He employed a large number of natives from the coast, Zanzibaris and
others, and established stations at various points along the river. His
first station is at the foot of the last cataracts on the Congo, and is
called Vivi; steamboats and ships of light draft can land at its wharves
and deliver or receive merchandise without difficulty. From Vivi he
built a wagon-road among the hills and across the plains on the north
bank of the Congo to the Isangila cataract, where he established
Isangila station. Along the road he carried steamboats which had been so
built that they could be readily taken apart, and put together again
when navigable water was reached. Above Isangila there is a distance of
ninety miles where the Congo is navigable, and here the steamboats were
used for purposes of transportation until falls were reached again. Then
another station (Manyanga) was established, more road was built, and so
on step by step Mr. Stanley reached Stanley Pool, at the head of the
group of cataracts that obstruct the navigation of the Lower Congo. Here
he established a station and started the town of Leopoldville, the name
being given in honor of the illustrious patron of the enterprise.

[Illustration: VIEW OF VIVI, FROM THE ISANGILA ROAD.]

"It was slow work building roads, transporting material, goods, and
provisions, establishing stations, negotiating with the local chiefs,
and in other ways performing the work of permanent colonization along
the great river. The expedition landed at Vivi in September, 1879; it
was not until June, 1881, that it reached Stanley Pool, above the
highest of the cataracts. To say that the Africans were astonished at
the enterprise is to state the case very feebly. They gave Stanley the
name of Bula Matari (Rock Breaker), in consequence of his cutting
through the rocks in his work of road-making. Such a thing had never
before been known in Africa, and as Bula Matari he is known there to
this day and will long be remembered.

[Illustration: PORT OF LEOPOLDVILLE.]

"From Stanley Pool the Congo is navigable to Stanley Falls, a distance
of nearly one thousand miles. As soon as the steamers could be put
together and affairs at Leopoldville were in a tranquil condition, Mr.
Stanley proceeded up the river and established stations at various
points. Then he explored some of the tributaries of the great river,
discovered a lake which he named Leopold II., established peaceable
relations with the native tribes, opened trade wherever trade was
possible, and learned as much as he could about the country and its
sources. On his first expedition, described in 'Through the Dark
Continent,' he learned enough to convince him that the resources of the
Congo were very great; what he ascertained during his later explorations
confirmed in every way his earlier impressions and made him an
enthusiastic advocate of the settlement and development of the Congo
basin.

"I haven't time to give you more than a bare outline of the work he
performed there. The story is told in his later book, 'The Congo, and
the Founding of its Free State,' a work in two volumes, which, like the
'Dark Continent,' has been published in several languages. Mr. Stanley
returned from Africa in season to take part in the Congress or
Conference of nations at Berlin in the latter part of 1884, where the
affairs of the Congo State were discussed and an international treaty
was made establishing the relations of the new state with the rest of
the world. The country was opened to the commerce of all nations on the
principle of free trade; a large territory on the north of the Congo
State was given to France, while the right of Portugal to a large area
on the south was established. Previous to the Conference there was a
threat of trouble with both France and Portugal, but all was made smooth
when the plenipotentiaries met and talked matters over.

"The progress of civilization on the Congo has been very rapid," Doctor
Bronson continued. "Before Mr. Stanley's adventurous journey in 1877 no
white man had looked upon the Congo between NyangwÃ© and the lower
cataracts; now there are permanent stations and trading posts all the
way along the great stream from its mouth to Stanley Falls, and several
stations have been established on the tributaries of the Congo wherever
there is a promise of commerce. The route to NyangwÃ© is as safe as any
part of Africa, and from thence to Tanganika Lake and Zanzibar there are
no obstacles to traffic and travel. Recently a young officer of the
Swedish navy crossed the African continent by way of the Congo, NyangwÃ©,
and Lake Tanganika, and thence by the usual route to Zanzibar. He made
the entire journey in seven months, or in two months less time than was
taken by Stanley for his descent of the Congo from NyangwÃ© to Boma."

One of the youths asked how many steamboats are now on the Congo and its
tributaries.

[Illustration: A PHOTOGRAPH.]

"Mr. Stanley told me this morning," replied the Doctor, "that there are
eight steamers running above Leopoldville and Stanley Pool, and two on
the ninety-mile strip of navigable water between the Isangila Fall and
Manyanga. Several new steamers will be placed on the Congo during 1887,
some by the Congo State, others by an American trading company, and
others by the missionaries. By the end of 1887 it is probable that not
fewer than twenty steamers will be established on the Congo, at least
fifteen of them above the lower series of falls. It is in contemplation
to place steamers above Stanley Falls, so that navigation can be
continued to NyangwÃ© and thus shorten the time of transit from the lower
Congo to Lake Tanganika. The whole valley of the Congo is open to the
commerce of the world only ten years after Mr. Stanley's famous journey
'Through the Dark Continent.'"

[Illustration: A CONGO HOUSE.]

The Doctor paused a moment to glance at a slip which had been cut from a
newspaper, and then continued:

"At its mouth the Congo River is of enormous depth, but only one hundred
miles or so above Stanley Pool, Captain Braconnier said, a year or two
ago, that 'steam-launches drawing barely two and a half feet of water
have to be dragged along by our men.' H. H. Johnston mentions the same
fact in his description of the Congo. 'Our boat is constantly running
aground on sand-banks,' he wrote. 'It has an extraordinary effect to see
men walking half-way over a great branch of the river, with water only
up to their ankles, tracing the course of some hidden sand-bank.'
Stanley, Johnston, and others attributed the remarkable shallowness of
the river to its great breadth in this part of its course; but none of
them knew how wide the river really is above the Kassai River.

"We now have some new light on this question, which is a very
interesting one, because the Congo is next to the greatest river in the
world, and new discoveries with regard to it are apt to be on a large
scale. Captain Rouvier has been surveying this part of the river, and
he finds that for a distance of about fifty miles the Congo is much
wider than was supposed. Its width, in fact, is from fifteen to twenty
miles, a circumstance that has not been discovered before on account of
many long islands, some of which have always been taken for one shore of
the river. It follows, therefore, that there is an expanse on the upper
Congo similar to and very much larger than Stanley Pool. Steamboats have
passed each other in this enlargement of the river without knowing of
each other's proximity.

[Illustration: THE EFFECT OF CIVILIZATION.]

"It is easy to understand, therefore, how it happens that the Congo is
in this place so very shallow, while in narrow portions of the lower
river no plummet-line has ever yet touched bottom. Navigation in this
part of the Congo would be almost impossible were it not that here and
there soundings are revealing channels deep and wide enough for all the
requirements of steamboat traffic.

"The great explorer has planned a railway from Vivi to Leopoldville, so
that the lower series of falls on the river will no longer be a
hinderance to commerce. This railway will be about two hundred and
thirty-five miles long, and Mr. Stanley estimates its cost and equipment
at something less than five millions of dollars, or one million pounds
sterling. He estimates its annual revenue from freight alone at one and
a half million dollars, while the passenger business would not be an
unimportant item. The up-freights would consist of cotton cloth, beads,
wire, muskets, gunpowder, cutlery, china-ware, iron, and other African
'trade-goods,' while the down-freights would include ivory, palm-oil,
ground-nuts, hippopotamus teeth and hides, rubber, beeswax, gum copal,
monkey and other skins, and several kinds of fine woods used in
cabinet-making. Doubtless other products of Central Africa would come
into market which are now unknown in consequence of the high cost of
transportation.

[Illustration: A NATIVE OF THE LOWER CONGO.]

"Mr. Stanley says the navigable waters of the Congo basin that would
have their outlet through the Congo railway are more than five thousand
miles in length, draining a country of more than a million square miles,
much of which is well peopled. The free State of Congo, as defined by
the Berlin Conference, includes a territory of one million five hundred
and eight thousand square miles, with a population estimated at
forty-two million six hundred and eight thousand. North of the Congo
State is the French possession of sixty-two thousand square miles and
two million one hundred and twenty-one thousand six hundred inhabitants,
and on the south is the Portuguese territory of thirty thousand seven
hundred square miles and three hundred thousand inhabitants. So you see
the Congo State, which our friend has created, is one third the area of
the United States and more than one half its population.

"And here," said the Doctor, "is a speech made by Mr. Stanley at a
dinner which was given to him by the Lotos Club of New York, in
November, 1886. I will read an extract from it, with your permission."

Everybody signified a desire to hear it, whereupon Doctor Bronson read
as follows:

     "I set out to Africa intending to complete Livingstone's
     explorations, also to settle the Nile problem as to where the
     head-waters of the Nile were, as to whether Lake Victoria consisted
     of one lake, one body of water, or a number of shallow lakes; to
     throw some light on Sir Samuel Baker's Albert Nyanza, and also to
     discover the outlet of Lake Tanganika, and then to find out what
     strange, mysterious river this was which Livingstone saw at
     NyangwÃ©--whether it were the Nile, the Niger, or the Congo. Edwin
     Arnold, the author of 'The Light of Asia,' said, 'Do you think you
     can do all this?' 'Don't ask me such a conundrum as that. Put down
     the funds and tell me to go. That's all.' And he induced Lawson,
     the proprietor, to consent. The funds were had, and I went.

     "First of all we settled the problem of the Victoria; that it was
     one body of water; that instead of being a cluster of shallow lakes
     or marshes, it was one body of water, twenty-one thousand five
     hundred square miles in extent. While endeavoring to throw light
     upon Sir Samuel Baker's Albert Nyanza, we discovered a new lake, a
     much superior lake to the Albert Nyanza--the Dead Locust Lake--and
     at the same time Gordon Pasha sent his lieutenant to discover and
     circumnavigate the Albert Nyanza, and he found it to be only a
     miserable one hundred and forty miles, because Baker, in a fit of
     enthusiasm, had stood on the brow of a high plateau and, looking
     down on the dark-blue waters of Albert Nyanza, cried, romantically:
     'I see it extending indefinitely towards the southwest!'
     'Indefinitely' is not a geographical expression, gentlemen.

     "We found that there was no outlet to the Tanganika, although it
     was a sweet-water lake. After settling that problem, day after day,
     as we glided down the strange river that had lured and bewildered
     Livingstone, we were in as much doubt as Livingstone had been when
     he wrote his last letter and said: 'I will never be made black
     man's meat for anything less than the classic Nile.' After
     travelling four hundred miles we came to the Stanley Falls, and
     beyond them we saw the river deflect from its Nileward course
     towards the northwest. Then it turned west, and visions of towers
     and towns and strange tribes and strange nations broke upon our
     imagination, and we wondered what we were going to see, when the
     river suddenly took a decided turn towards the southwest, and our
     dreams were terminated. We saw then that it was aiming directly for
     the Congo, and when we had propitiated some natives whom we
     encountered by showing them crimson beads and polished wire that
     had been polished for the occasion, we said: 'This for your answer.
     What river is this?' 'Why, it is _the_ river, of course.' That was
     not an answer, and it required some persuasion before the chief,
     bit by bit, digging into his brain, managed to roll out sonorously
     the words: 'It is the Ko-to-yah Congo'--'It is the river of
     Congoland.'

     "Alas for our classic dreams! Alas for Crophi and Mophi, the fabled
     fountains of Herodotus! Alas for the banks of the river where Moses
     was found by the daughter of Pharaoh! This is the parvenu Congo!
     Then we glided on and on, past strange nations and cannibals--not
     past those nations which have their heads under their arms--for
     eleven hundred miles, until we arrived at a circular extension of
     the river, and my last remaining white companion called it the
     Stanley Pool, and then, five months after that, our journey ended.

     "After that I had a very good mind to come back to America and say,
     like the Queen of Uganda, 'There, what did I tell you?' But you
     know the fates would not permit me to come over in 1878. The very
     day I landed in Europe, the King of Italy gave me an express train
     to convey me to France, and the very moment I descended from it at
     Marseilles, there were three ambassadors from the King of the
     Belgians, asking me to go back to Africa.

     "'What! Back to Africa? Never! I have come for civilization. I have
     come for enjoyment. I have come for love, for life, for pleasure.
     Not I. Go and ask some of those people you know who have never yet
     been to Africa. I have had enough of it.' 'Well, perhaps, by and
     by--' 'Ah, I don't know what will happen by and by, but just now,
     never, never! Not for Rothschild's wealth!'

     "I was received by the Paris Geographical Society, and it was then
     I began to feel, 'Well, after all, I have done something, haven't
     I?' I felt superb. But you know I have always considered myself a
     republican. I have those bullet-riddled flags and those arrow-torn
     flags, the Stars and Stripes, that I carried in Africa for the
     discovery of Livingstone, and that crossed Africa, and I venerate
     those old flags. I have them in London, now jealously guarded in
     the secret recesses of my cabinet. I allow only my best friends to
     look at them, and if any of you gentlemen ever happen in at my
     quarters, I will show them to you.

     "After I had written my book, 'Through the Dark Continent,' I began
     to lecture, using these words: 'I have passed through a land
     watered by the largest river of the African continent, and that
     land knows no owner. A word to the wise is sufficient. You have
     cloths and hardware and glass-ware and gunpowder, and those
     millions of natives have ivory and gums and rubber and dyestuffs,
     and in barter there is good profit.

     "'The King of the Belgians commissioned me to go to that country.
     My expedition when we started from the coast numbered three hundred
     colored people and fourteen Europeans. We returned with three
     thousand trained black men and three hundred Europeans. The first
     sum allowed to me was $50,000 per year, but it has ended at
     something like $700,000 a year. Thus you see the progress of
     civilization. We found the Congo having only canoes. To-day there
     are eight steamers. It was said at first that King Leopold was a
     dreamer. He dreamed he could unite the barbarians of Africa into a
     confederacy and call it a free state; but on February 25, 1885, the
     powers of Europe, and America also, ratified an act recognizing the
     territories acquired by us to be the free and independent State of
     the Congo.'

     "Perhaps when the members of the Lotos Club have reflected a little
     more upon the value of what Livingstone and Leopold have been
     doing, they will also agree that these men have done their duty in
     this world, and in the age that they live, and that their labor has
     not been in vain, on account of the great sacrifices they have
     made, to the benighted millions of dark Africa."

Here the Doctor paused to enable his listeners to ponder a few moments
on the magnitude of the work which their hero had accomplished, and also
to wait for any question which might be asked. The first interrogatory
referred to Mr. Stanley's present mission to Africa, for which he had
abandoned his lecturing tour in America.

"What is he going to Africa for now?" said one of the youths. "I have
read that it is to relieve somebody who is shut up in the middle of the
country and can't get out."

"You are quite right," was the reply, "but in order to have you
comprehend the situation I must give you a little explanation.

[Illustration: EMIN PASHA.]

"Most of you know," the Doctor continued, "about the rebellion in the
Soudan country several years ago by which Egypt lost her possessions in
Central Africa, and her power was completely overthrown in a region that
she had held for more than sixty years, or had conquered since that
time. Khartoum was captured, General Gordon was killed, and the
provinces of the Soudan became independent of the khedive. Many of the
white men in the country were forced to enter the service of the rebels
in order to save their lives, as escape was next to impossible.

"This was the case in the northern part of the Soudan, and it was
generally supposed that the same state of affairs prevailed farther
south. The equatorial province of the Egyptian Soudan was entirely cut
off from communication with the outer world, and the belief was general
that its governor, Emin Bey, had been killed by the rebels. But in the
latter part of 1886 news came that he was still alive, and had
maintained his position in a hostile country through the fidelity of the
Egyptian troops that remained with him. He was short of ammunition and
destitute of many other things necessary for the support of his people,
his soldiers were in rags, and he feared that he would not be able to
hold out much longer unless relief was sent to him."

[Illustration: BLACKSMITH'S FORGE AND BELLOWS.]

One of the youths asked how the news was brought from Emin's province so
that the rest of the world could get it.

"It was brought," was the reply, "by Dr. Junker, a Russian scientist,
who was with Emin at the time of the insurrection. You remember King
Mtesa of Uganda, whom Mr. Stanley converted to Christianity and who
asked that missionaries should be sent to instruct his people? Well, the
missionaries went there and were well received, but before they had
accomplished anything of consequence Mtesa died and was succeeded by his
son Mwanga. The son was opposed to the new religion, and very soon after
he was raised to the throne he imprisoned the missionaries and ordered
all of his people who had embraced Christianity to be put to death.
Bishop Hannington, who had gone from England to take charge of the
mission work in Central Africa, was killed by orders of Mwanga, and all
white men were forbidden to set foot in the country. Dr. Junker came
through Uganda on his way to the sea-coast, but he was brought
ostensibly as a slave by an Arab trader. Mwanga heard that there was a
white man in the Arab merchant's caravan, but when the merchant told him
that it was a slave he had bought, and exhibited the captive tied with
the rest of the slaves, the king made no objection. He was, no doubt, so
greatly rejoiced to see the white man in captivity and disgrace that he
did not wish to disturb him."[11]

[11] Since the above was written a telegram has been received from
Zanzibar, April 15th, which says: "A Somali trader from the Uganda
country has arrived here bearing advices from Emin Bey. He was
established, when the trader left, at Wadelai, north of the Albert
Nyanza. He had two small steamers plying on the White Nile and on the
lake. In November, which was four months later than the advices brought
by Dr. Junker, Emin Bey visited the King of Unyoro, who was a six days'
journey from Uganda. Emin Bey was accompanied on this journey by Dr.
Vita Hassan, ten Egyptian officers, three Greeks, and four negroes.
Subsequently he asked Mwanga, the King of Uganda, to receive him. The
king said he would willingly receive him if he came without followers.
Emin Bey thereupon went to King Mwanga, accompanied by Dr. Vita and
three Greeks. He and his companions remained with the king seventeen
days. Emin asked the king for permission to pass through his territory
towards Zanzibar. The king, upon hearing this request, ordered the
visitors to return the way they came, and declared he would have nothing
more to do with Europeans. King Mwanga is a youth only eighteen years of
age. He has a thousand wives. Sometimes he wears a Turkish and at other
times an Arab costume, and often reverts to the native simplicity in the
matter of dress. Emin Bey, when the king ordered him to return the way
he came, went back to Wadelai, and was glad to escape from Mwanga's
country. The Somali states that the messengers despatched from Zanzibar
to carry information to Emin Bey that Mr. Stanley had gone with an
expedition by way of the Congo River to effect his rescue were detained
in UnyanyembÃ© by the king, who was indisposed to allow them to proceed."

[Illustration: SOME OF EMIN PASHA'S IRREGULAR TROOPS.]

"What is the nationality of Emin?" queried Fred; "and why is he
sometimes called Emin Bey and sometimes Emin Pasha?"

[Illustration: IVORY-EATING SQUIRREL, CENTRAL AFRICA.]

"Emin is his Egyptian name," answered Doctor Bronson, "but the gentleman
is of Austrian birth and his real name is Dr. Schnitzler. He was an
Austrian physician at the Turkish court at one time; afterwards he went
to Egypt, and in 1877 was appointed to the command of the equatorial
province of Egypt. He is about forty-two years old, tall and thin, very
near-sighted, and a most accomplished linguist; he speaks German,
French, English, Italian, Arabic, Turkish, and several African
languages, is a great scientist and a prudent and careful commander of
his people. At last accounts he had with him ten white Egyptian
officers, fifteen black non-commissioned officers, twenty Coptish
clerks, and three hundred Egyptian soldiers with their families.

[Illustration: BATTLE BETWEEN NATIVE WARRIORS AND EGYPTIAN TROOPS.]

"The rank of bey in the Turkish and Egyptian service corresponds to that
of colonel in our language, while pasha or pacha is the equivalent of
general. Since he was appointed to the command of the province Emin has
been promoted; he was then Emin Bey and is now Emin Pasha. It is the
Oriental custom to put the title after the name instead of before it;
just as we might say Smith General, or Brown Major."

[Illustration: NATIVE WARRIOR IN EMIN PASHA'S PROVINCE.]

"And can't Emin Pasha get away from where he is?" one of the youths
asked.

"Certainly, if he came with a small body of picked men and with reliable
guides," was the reply. "But he could not get away with all his people
and their families, and he absolutely refuses to desert them. They have
been faithful to him, and he believes in rewarding fidelity with
fidelity.

"He cannot come away through Uganda," Doctor Bronson explained, "because
the new king, Mwanga, would not let him pass. He cannot go through
Unyoro because the king of that country is leagued with Mwanga to keep
out all white men, and kill them if they persist in entering his
territory. There is a route through Masai land, north of Lake Victoria,
but it would be unsafe, as the King of Uganda would be sure to hear of
an expedition there and take measures to stop it. He might travel
westward to the Congo or one of its tributaries without much danger of
interference, but he has no provisions and too little ammunition to
defend himself and his people in case of hostility."

"And I suppose Mr. Stanley is going to carry ammunition, trade goods,
and money to Emin Pasha," said one of the young auditors.

"He has been engaged for that object," replied the Doctor. "The cost of
the expedition is to be paid partly by the Egyptian government and
partly by liberal gentlemen in Great Britain. Mr. William Mackinnon, a
wealthy Scotchman, has contributed one hundred thousand dollars for the
enterprise, and other gentlemen have given freely to the good work.

[Illustration: THE KING OF UNYORO AND HIS GREAT CHIEFS.]

"I call it good work," he continued, "because, according to all
accounts, Emin Pasha has created a model government in the middle of
Africa, and greatly benefited the people under his charge. He has
suppressed slavery and slave-trading, taught many useful employments to
the natives, developed agriculture, the raising of cattle and other
industries, and almost entirely put an end to crime of all sorts. The
province is divided into districts, each of which has a military station
in its centre, where the taxes in grain and cattle are paid. Lado, the
capital, is a well-built town, with a fortification for its defence, and
the sanitary arrangements are of the most perfect character. Everything
at Lado is under the personal supervision of Emin Pasha, and his
subjects have learned to love him for the good he has done them.

"If Emin Pasha should be forced to flee or surrender, the country would
speedily fall into its old ways, and all the horrors of the slave-trade
would be renewed; consequently Mr. Stanley's mission is in the nature of
a missionary enterprise, and we should all hope for its complete
success. We shall know more about it after we have been awhile in
England, as Mr. Stanley is naturally reticent about his plans, and, in
fact, cannot make them very definitely until he arrives there. So we
will drop the subject for the present, and, if there is no further
business, it will be well for us to adjourn."

In accordance with this suggestion, the society made its final
adjournment, but we may be sure that its sessions will long be
remembered by those who attended them.

On the arrival of the steamer at Southampton our friends said good-bye
to Mr. Stanley, with many wishes for his success in his new journey to
the Dark Continent. In response to their friendly words Mr. Stanley made
cordial expression of his pleasure at having made their acquaintance,
which he hoped to renew about a year later, if all should go well with
him and his expedition.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mr. Stanley remained about three weeks in England, busily occupied with
preparations for his journey, and making a hasty trip to Brussels to
confer with King Leopold, who placed the Congo fleet and the property of
the Congo State generally at the explorer's disposal. The supplies,
ammunition, and other material were shipped from England direct to the
Congo, and Mr. Stanley proceeded to Zanzibar, by way of Cairo, to engage
men for the expedition. What he accomplished there is best told in the
following letter from his pen:

[Illustration: NATIVE WAR DANCE.]

     "On arriving at Zanzibar I found our agent, Mr. Mackenzie, had
     managed everything so well, with the good offices of Mr. Holmwood,
     the acting consul-general, that the expedition was almost ready for
     embarkation. The steamer _Madura_, of the British India Steam
     Navigation Company, was in the harbor, provisioned and watered for
     the voyage. The goods for barter and transport animals were on
     board. There were a few things to be done, however; such as
     arranging with the famous Tippu-Tib about our line of conduct
     towards one another. Tippu-Tib is a much greater man to-day than he
     was in the year 1877, when he escorted my caravan, preliminary to
     our voyage down the Congo. He has invested his hard-earned fortune
     in guns and powder. Adventurous Arabs have flocked to his standard
     until he is now an uncrowned king of the region between Stanley
     Falls and Tanganika Lake, commanding many thousands of men inured
     to fighting and wild equatorial life. If I discovered hostile
     intentions in him my idea was to give him a wide berth, for the
     ammunition I had to convoy to Emin Pasha, if captured and employed
     by him, would endanger the existence of the infant State of the
     Congo, and imperil all our hopes. Between Tippu-Tib and Mwanga,
     King of Uganda, there was only a choice of the frying-pan and the
     fire. It was with due caution that I sounded Tippu-Tib on the first
     day of my arrival, and I found him fully prepared for any
     eventuality, to fight or to be employed. I chose the latter, and we
     proceeded to business. You will please understand that his aid was
     not required to enable me to reach Emin Pasha, or to show the road
     to Wadelay, or Lake Albert, which is a region he knows nothing
     about. There are four roads available from the Congo; two of them
     were in Tippu-Tib's power to close, the remaining two were clear of
     his influence. But Dr. Junker informed me at our Cairo interview
     that Emin Pasha had about seventy-five tons of ivory with him. So
     much ivory would amount to Â£60,000, at eight shillings per pound.
     The subscription of Egypt to the Emin Pasha Relief Fund is large
     for her present state of depressed finances. In this ivory we have
     a possible means of recouping the sum paid out of her treasury,
     with a large sum left towards defraying expenses, and perhaps
     leaving a handsome balance. Why not attempt the carriage of this
     ivory to the Congo? Accordingly I wished to engage Tippu-Tib and
     his people to assist me in conveying this ivory. After a good deal
     of bargaining I entered into a contract with him, by which he
     agreed to supply six hundred carriers at Â£6 per loaded head each
     round trip, from Stanley Falls to Lake Albert and back. Thus, if
     each carrier carries seventy pounds weight of ivory, one round trip
     will bring to the fund Â£13,200 net at Stanley Falls.

     [Illustration: BREED OF CATTLE IN EMIN PASHA'S PROVINCE.]

     "On the conclusion of this contract, which was entered into in the
     presence of the British consul-general, I broached another subject
     with Tippu-Tib in the name of his majesty, King Leopold. Stanley
     Falls station was established by me in December, 1883. Various
     Europeans have since commanded this station, and Lieutenant Wester,
     of the Swedish army, had succeeded in making it a well-ordered and
     presentable station. Captain Deane, his successor, however,
     quarrelled with the Arabs, and at his forced departure from the
     scene set fire to the station and blew up the Krupps. The object
     for which the station was established was the prevention of the
     Arabs from pursuing their devastating career below the falls--not
     so much by force as by tact, or, rather, the happy combination of
     both. By the retreat of the officers of the State from Stanley
     Falls the flood-gates were opened and the Arabs pressed down the
     river. Tippu-Tib being, of course, the guiding-spirit of the Arabs
     west of Tanganika Lake, it was advisable to see how far his aid
     might be secured to check this stream of Arabs from destroying the
     country. After the interchange of messages by cable with Brussels,
     on the second day of my stay at Zanzibar, I signed an engagement
     with Tippu-Tib by which he was appointed Governor of Stanley Falls,
     at a regular salary, paid monthly at Zanzibar to the British
     consul-general's hands. His duties will be principally to defend
     Stanley Falls in the name of the State against all Arabs and
     natives. The flag of the station will be that of the State. At all
     hazards he is to defeat and capture all persons raiding the
     territory for slaves, and to disperse all bodies of men who may be
     justly suspected of violent designs. He is to abstain from all
     slave-traffic below the falls himself, and to prevent all in his
     command from trading in slaves. In order to insure a faithful
     performance of his engagements with the State, a European officer
     is to be appointed Resident at the falls. A breach of any article
     in the contract being reported, the salary is to cease.

     [Illustration: LADO, CAPITAL OF EGYPTIAN EQUATORIAL PROVINCE.]

     "Meantime, while I was engaged in these negotiations, Mr. Mackenzie
     had paid four months' advance wages to six hundred and twenty men
     and boys enlisted in the relief expedition, and as fast as each
     batch of fifty men was satisfactorily paid, a barge was hauled
     alongside, the men were duly embarked, and a steam-launch towed the
     barge to the transport. By three P.M. all hands were on board, and
     the steamer moved off to a more distant anchorage. By midnight
     Tippu-Tib and his people and every person connected with the
     expedition were on board, and at day-break next day, the 25th of
     February, the anchor was lifted, and we steamed away towards the
     Cape of Good Hope.

     [Illustration: SCHOOLI WARRIOR, EGYPTIAN EQUATORIAL PROVINCE.]

     "So far there has not been a hitch in any arrangement. Difficulties
     have been smoothed as if by magic. Everybody has shown the utmost
     sympathy and been prompt with the assistance required. The officers
     of the expedition were kept fully employed from morning to evening
     at laborious tasks connected with the repacking of the ammunition
     for Emin Pasha's force. Letters were also sent by myself to Emin
     Pasha, acquainting him with our mission and the probable time of
     our arrival at Lake Albert, with directions as to the locality we
     should aim for. Tippu-Tib likewise sent couriers to Stanley Falls
     to acquaint his people of his departure by sea round the Cape to
     the Congo, with orders to concentrate in readiness at the falls."

[Illustration: FORTIFIED VILLAGE NEAR LADO.]

Before leaving Cairo, where he had an interview with Dr. Junker, Mr.
Stanley wrote to the chairman of the relief committee in London, in
which he explained the objects of the expedition as follows:

[Illustration: ISMAEN ABOU HATAB, TRUSTED OFFICER OF EMIN PASHA.]

     "The expedition is non-military--that is to say, its purpose is not
     to fight, destroy, or waste; its purpose is to save, to relieve
     distress, and to carry comfort. Emin Pasha may be a good man, a
     brave officer, and a gallant fellow, deserving of a strong effort
     of relief; but I decline to believe, and I have not been able to
     gather from any one in England an impression that his life, or the
     lives of the few hundreds under him, would overbalance the lives of
     thousands of natives, and the devastation of immense tracts of
     country which an expedition strictly military would naturally
     cause. The expedition is a mere powerful caravan, armed with rifles
     for the purpose of insuring the safe conduct of the ammunition to
     Emin Pasha, and for the more certain protection of this people
     during the retreat home. But it also has means of purchasing the
     friendship of tribes and chiefs, of buying food, and paying its way
     liberally."

[Illustration: VILLAGE IN THE VALLEY OF THE BENGO.]

The point where he expects to meet Emin Pasha is purposely kept secret,
but it will probably be at the southern end of Lake Albert, unless King
Mwanga threatens trouble, in which case the march may be directed to
Wadelay, on the White Nile. Stanley's fighting force, in case he is
opposed by hostile natives, will consist of sixty Soudanese soldiers, in
addition to the Zanzibaris, Somalis, and other east and west coast
natives, enlisted in his expedition. When he went to Cairo he specially
requested that a small force of Soudanese should be placed at his
command. Volunteers were called for, and out of a large number who
offered their services sixty picked men were chosen. These men are fine
specimens of the soldiers who composed the larger part of the force with
which Egypt held her Central African provinces. It was of such soldiers
as these that Emin Pasha wrote these words last year:

     "Deprived of the most necessary things, for a long time without any
     pay, my men fought valiantly, and when at last hunger weakened
     them, when, after nineteen days of incredible privations and
     sufferings, their strength was exhausted, and when the last torn
     leather of the last boot had been eaten, then they cut a way
     through the midst of their enemies and succeeded in saving
     themselves. If ever I had any doubts of the negro, the history of
     the siege of Amadi would have proved to me that the black race is
     in valor and courage inferior to no other, while in devotion and
     self-denial it is superior to many. Without any orders from capable
     officers, these men performed miracles, and it will be very
     difficult for the Egyptian government worthily to show its
     gratitude to my soldiers and officers."

[Illustration: A TRAVELLER'S CARAVAN NEAR WADELAY.]

On the long march between Stanley Falls and Lake Albert, or Wadelay,
these soldiers will perform guard and police duty for the expedition,
and will defend it if attacked. Stanley also carries a machine-gun of
the Maxim pattern, which was specially constructed so as to be carried
by porters. If the explorer has occasion to show the natives that the
gun will fire six hundred shots a minute, and that it will kill a
hippopotamus or sink a canoe at a distance of a mile, he thinks the
weapon will acquire a prestige which will make the savage glad to
renounce any idea of attempting to impede his party with their poor
spears and arrows. Lieutenant Stairns, an officer in the Engineer Corps
of the British army, who accompanies Stanley, has special charge of the
Maxim gun.

[Illustration: A DYOOR, SUBJECT OF EMIN PASHA.]

Two members of Stanley's party, who have been among King Leopold's
agents on the Congo, went directly from Liverpool to the Congo for the
purpose of hiring about three hundred porters to assist in transporting
the goods around the Livingstone cataract to Stanley Pool, where the
Upper Congo fleet was ordered to be in readiness to receive the
expedition. Mr. Stanley estimates that his progress on the land march
will not be greater than six to ten miles a day.

The expedition reached Banana Point, at the mouth of the Congo, on the
18th of March, and on the same day re-embarked on vessels belonging to
the International Association, which were awaiting the expedition. On
the 19th the expedition anchored at Boma, the seat of the general
administration of the Congo Free State, and a cordial reception was
given the whole body. Mr. Stanley was confident of the success of his
enterprise, and hoped that by June or July he would be able to render
effectual assistance to Emin Pasha. The Congo Association had arranged
to victual the expedition from Matada to Leopoldville. The expedition
left Boma on March 21, arrived at Matada on the 22d, and there
disembarked, the river being unnavigable thence to Leopoldville, on
account of the Livingstone Falls. The expedition was to proceed on foot
for eighteen days along the falls to Leopoldville, where Mr. Stanley was
to be met by four steamers belonging to the Congo State. The English and
French mission stations of the Upper Congo had also been requested to
place their steamers at his service.

Mr. Stanley's plans for a railway around the Livingstone Falls, on the
Lower Congo, have aroused the Portuguese, who fear the effects of the
new line of commerce. They have begun the construction of a railway from
San Paulo de Loanda up the valley of the Bengo River to Ambaca, a
distance of about two hundred and fifty miles. English and American
engineers are in charge of the work, and they hope to complete the line
in about three years. The railway can hardly be called a rival of Mr.
Stanley's, as it is a long way south of the Congo, and its principal
uses will be to preserve the local trade which centres at Ambaca, and
prevent its diversion to the stations of the Congo State. The surveys
for the Congo railway are in progress while these pages are in the
printer's hands.

[Illustration: CHIEF OF COAST TRIBE IN PORTUGUESE TERRITORY.]




CHAPTER XX.

MORE AFRICAN STUDIES.--MASAI LAND.--EARLY HISTORY OF THE MOMBASA
COAST.--MOUNT KILIMANJARO.--ITS DISCOVERERS AND EXPLORERS.--REBMANN'S
UMBRELLA.--THOMSON'S EXPEDITION AND ITS OBJECT.--FRERE TOWN AND
MOMBASA.--JOURNEY TO MASAI LAND.--HOSTILITY OF THE NATIVES.--NARROW
ESCAPES.--MASAI WARRIORS AND THEIR OCCUPATIONS.--MANNERS AND CUSTOMS OF
THE PEOPLE.--THOMSON AS A MAGICIAN.--JOHNSTON'S KILIMANJARO
EXPEDITION.--HEIGHT AND PECULIARITIES OF THE GREAT MOUNTAIN.--MANDARA
AND HIS COURT.--SLAVE-TRADING.--MASAI WOMEN.--SURROUNDED BY
LIONS.--BISHOP HANNINGTON.--STORY OF HIS DEATH IN UGANDA.


It was mentioned in the first chapter of this volume that Frank and Fred
had provided themselves with a parcel of books which were to constitute
the reading-matter for the voyage, "Through the Dark Continent" being of
the number. Transatlantic travellers generally carry four or five times
as many books as they can possibly read during their transit over the
ocean, and our young friends were no exceptions to the rule. They were
so absorbed with the readings which have just been described, and the
presence of Mr. Stanley on the steamer, that they gave little attention
to books other than the interesting volume under consideration.

[Illustration: TATTOOING AMONG THE COAST NATIVES.]

But they were not to be thwarted in their determination to inform
themselves about Africa, and, after the voyage was over, devoted all the
time they could spare to the perusal of the books which had been left
unopened during the voyage. Frank busied himself with "Through Masai
Land," a journey of exploration among the snow-clad volcanic mountains
and strange tribes of eastern equatorial Africa, while Fred perused the
life of Bishop Hannington and the account of his mission to the people
of Uganda. As for Doctor Bronson, he contented himself with keeping an
eye on the progress of the youths in their readings and in turning the
leaves of "The Kilimanjaro Expedition," a volume which describes the
work of an expedition of the Royal Geographical Society for the study of
the region around Mount Kilimanjaro in eastern Africa, between the
Indian Ocean and the Victoria Nyanza.

[Illustration: DOORWAY OF A HOUSE AT MOMBASA.]

"What can you tell us about Masai Land?" said the Doctor to Frank, one
morning while they were at breakfast.

"It's a remarkable country," was the reply, "and though one of the parts
of Africa earliest known to travellers, so far as its coast is
concerned, it was one of the latest to be explored. The routes from
Zanzibar to Lakes Tanganika, Victoria, and Nyassa, and the Zambezi
country are now pretty well known and almost as familiar to the reading
public as the road from London to Brighton, but Masai Land was until
very recently practically unknown."

"Please tell us exactly where Masai Land is," said the doctor, "so that
we shall know what you are describing."

"It is that part of Africa east of the Victoria Nyanza," was the reply,
"and of a line drawn through that lake perhaps a hundred miles each way
north and south of it. Vasco di Gama, who first sailed around the Cape
of Good Hope, landed on the coast of this region and was near being
wrecked on the reefs of Mombasa, which is its principal port. The place
is mentioned in a Portuguese book published in 1530, and a curious fact
is that there was even at that early date a rumor of the existence of
the snow-clad mountains that were never seen by a white man until 1848.
In fact, from the time of Vasco di Gama down to 1842 hardly anything was
added to our knowledge of that part of the world."

"Are you sure about the mention of the high mountains in that Portuguese
book?"

"Entirely so," was the reply. "Mr. Thomson, the author of 'Through Masai
Land,' quotes from it as follows: 'West of Mombasa is the Mount Olympus
of Ethiopia, which is exceedingly high, and beyond it are the Mountains
of the Moon, in which are the sources of the Nile.' The Mount Olympus
which is thus mentioned is quite likely Kilimanjaro; the Mountains of
the Moon are not yet easy to locate, as they have not thus far been
found by explorers. They may possibly exist in some of the hitherto
untraversed regions on the southern borders of Abyssinia."

Fred wished to know who was the first white man to find the snow-clad
mountains of Central Africa.

"A German missionary named Krapf came to Mombasa in 1842 in search of a
way to open Eastern Africa to Christianity. He began studying the tribes
and people in the neighborhood, and was aided in that work by his
colleague, Mr. Rebmann. In 1847 the latter, accompanied by only eight
men, made an expedition from the coast as far as the desert region
beyond the rich littoral belt, and reached the broken country in the
direction of Kilimanjaro. In 1848 he made another journey and for the
first time saw the famous mountain, though he was compelled to turn back
when still forty miles from its summit. The good man was accompanied by
only nine porters, and his only weapon was an umbrella."

"Only an umbrella!" exclaimed Fred, in astonishment.

"Yes, only an umbrella, as he thought it quite enough for a peace-loving
missionary to carry. But he seems to have changed his mind later on, as
we find him arming his porters with guns and increasing their numbers,
though he still adhered to the old weapon of his first trip. In one part
of his journal, on his third expedition, he says: 'It often rained the
livelong night, with myself and people lying in the open air without any
other shelter than my solitary umbrella.' But it is noticeable that as
soon as he began to arm his men he got into trouble, as his third
expedition was robbed of everything it possessed and Rebmann was forced
to retreat in great distress to the coast.

[Illustration: HEADS OF COAST NATIVES.]

"This is the last we hear of Rebmann in exploration," continued Frank,
"but his work was followed up by his companion, Dr. Krapf. The latter
started in 1851 to found a mission in the interior, but was driven back
with a narrow escape from death. He tells how at one time he was
attacked by robbers who did not stop at the gunshots fired at them. They
pressed on and on, and finally, when the situation was becoming
desperate, the doctor opened his umbrella, which so frightened the
scoundrels that they fled in terror.

"Several explorers, missionaries, and others penetrated into the country
as far as Kilimanjaro, but rarely beyond it, in the thirty years
following 1851, and each of them found the journey more difficult than
had been the case with his predecessor, on account of the hostility of
the natives and the Arab traders. In 1882 the Royal Geographical
Society sent an expedition under command of Mr. Joseph Thomson, who had
recently returned from Central Africa, where he had made some extensive
explorations. The object of the expedition was purely geographical, Mr.
Thomson being instructed to ascertain if a practicable direct route for
European travellers could be found from any one of the ports of East
Africa to Lake Victoria, to examine Mount Kenia, to gather all possible
data for a map of the region, and obtain general information concerning
the country and its character, people, animal and vegetable life. The
story of what he did on this expedition is told in 'Through Masai
Land.'"

"Of course he went first to Zanzibar," said Fred; "that seems to be the
starting-point for nearly every expedition for exploring Eastern
Africa."

[Illustration: VIEW OF MOMBASA.]

"Yes," was the reply, "he not only went first to Zanzibar, but he
outfitted his expedition at that point and hired most of his porters
among the Zanzibaris. Then he went up the coast to Mombasa, which he
made his starting-point for the land journey; he took a few of the coast
natives from Mombasa as porters, but did not find them as satisfactory
as the Zanzibaris. Among the head men that he engaged for his expedition
were several who had served with Stanley in his journey across the
continent, including Manwa Sera and KachÃ©chÃ©, the detective. He was
greatly disappointed with the former, as he proved altogether lazy and
indifferent to his duties; he prided himself so much on his service with
Stanley that he regarded himself as a purely ornamental personage while
with Mr. Thomson. KachÃ©chÃ© was somewhat better, and as chief of the
commissary department he did very well. Mr. Thomson's chief assistant
was a Maltese sailor named James Martin, who was unable to read or
write, but he had a liberal amount of common-sense that served him in
place of education. During the whole journey there was never a single
unpleasantness between Mr. Thomson and Martin, which is an exceedingly
rare thing in African travel."

"How did they go from Zanzibar to Mombasa?" Fred inquired.

"They went in Arab dhows," Frank answered, "and had a very uncomfortable
voyage. But as the distance is only one hundred and twenty miles, or two
degrees of latitude, it did not last long, and the whole party was
landed safely. Mombasa is on an island; on the other side of the creek
which separates it from the mainland is a settlement known as Frere
Town."

"I've read about that place," said Fred. "It was founded in accordance
with a suggestion of Sir Bartle Frere, when he went to Zanzibar in
1873 to try to suppress the slave-trade. The Church Missionary Society
of England supplied the money, and the station was established and put
in charge of several missionaries. Liberated slaves taken by British
cruisers along the coast were sent to Frere Town, and in less than a
year after the settlement was made not less than five hundred had been
sent there. The natives of the neighborhood were attracted to the place,
the population increased, and Frere Town may now be considered the
principal station of the Church Missionary Society in Africa. At least
that's what I've read in the life of Bishop Hannington."

"You're quite right," said Frank, "and Mr. Thomson received more help
from the missionaries in setting out for Masai Land than he did from the
Arab authorities of Zanzibar. Several of the men that he hired at
Zanzibar had failed to appear when the expedition started, and he
managed to fill their places with men from Frere Town. In addition to
his assistant, head men, cooks, and personal attendants, he had one
hundred and thirteen porters laden with the goods and belongings of the
expedition. Twenty-nine carried beads, thirty-four iron, brass, and
copper wire, fourteen cloth, fifteen personal stores, nine books, boots,
etc., six scientific instruments, photographic apparatus and the like,
and ten were laden with tents and tent furniture, cooking utensils, and
articles for the table. Then there were ten Askari, or soldiers, and
several boys who were expected to be useful in various ways.

"He had the usual trouble with his porters for the first few days on the
road, and his soldiers were very busy hunting up deserters and keeping
the lines in order. The men engaged at Mombasa and Frere Town were worse
than the Zanzibaris, the latter being more accustomed to this kind of
work, and besides they were already a good distance from home. Every
morning the bugle was sounded and the procession started, the English
flag being carried in front to denote its nationality to all whom they
might meet on the way. At night the camp was made in open ground, where
no one could leave without being seen, and the guards had orders to
shoot any one who should try to get away. These orders were given in a
loud voice in the hearing of all the porters, with the object of
frightening them rather than with any intention of killing them. The
order had a good effect, and the men were kept under control."

"I can't understand how it is," said Fred, "that men will engage to go
on an expedition and then run away from it at the first chance. Of
course I know there are timid persons who are brave at a distance and
cowardly when danger is near, but this wholesale desire to desert I
cannot comprehend."

[Illustration: CAMP OF AN ENGLISH EXPLORER IN AFRICA.]

"Evidently that is peculiar of Africans more than of any other people,"
the youth replied, "since all explorers tell the same story. You
remember how it was with Mr. Stanley, both when he left Zanzibar and
later when he started from Ujiji and NyangwÃ©. In the first place many
scoundrelly fellows enlist solely to get the advance pay and not with
any intention of keeping their agreement. Then, secondly, all sorts of
wild stories are told by the natives of the towns and villages through
which a caravan passes, or where it stops for a day or two, so that the
fears of the ignorant men are wrought upon. In Mr. Thomson's case the
people at Mombasa and Frere Town filled the heads of his porters with
the most horrible stories of the cruelties of the inhabitants of Masai
Land, and said they were going to certain death. This alarmed them very
greatly, and even a white man would have had good reason to hesitate. It
is a fact that most of the Arab caravans that had ventured into the
interior for the ten years previous to this expedition had met with
disaster; all of them had lost men or been robbed of at least a portion
of their goods, and one caravan lost no less than one hundred men, or
one third its entire strength.

"Mr. Thomson found that the Masai warriors came quite near the coast in
their marauding expeditions, and several of the Wa-kamba villages in the
region back of Frere Town had been plundered. The Wa-kamba people have
large herds of cattle, goats, and sheep; they drive these herds into
zeribas or stockades, at night, to prevent their capture, in raids by
the Masai. The stories of these raids continued to alarm Mr. Thomson's
porters, and, in spite of all his watchfulness, two of his men managed
to get away. The attempts at desertion were effectually stopped by the
circulation of a report that the Masai had occupied the road in the
rear, so that all stragglers and deserters would meet certain death.
From that time forward the men were kept in their places through fear of
being massacred, if once out of protection of the fighting-men of the
expedition."

Frank paused a few moments, and gave Fred an opportunity for another
question.

"You remarked," said Fred, "that the early explorers of the country in
the direction of Mount Kilimanjaro met with little opposition, Rebmann
being accompanied by only eight porters and weaponed with an umbrella.
How does it happen that later travellers have found the country so much
more difficult of access?"

[Illustration: SLAVE CARAVANS ON THE ROAD.]

"I forgot to explain that part of it," was the reply. "When Rebmann and
Krapf made their journeys the Arabs had not penetrated the country
with their slave-hunting expeditions, and consequently the people had
not been called to practise the art of war. In the last thirty years the
Arabs have pushed far into the interior of Masai Land, just as they have
pushed beyond Lake Tanganika and down the valley of the Congo. They have
made war upon the natives, burning their villages, devastating their
fields, killing those who opposed them and carrying their captives into
slavery. The terrible scenes described by Dr. Livingstone, in the
accounts of his work and travels, have been repeated over and over again
in the region which has Mombasa for its seaport, and thousands of slaves
have been shipped from that place to points where they could find a
market. The English cruisers along the coast keep a sharp watch for the
Arab slave-dhows, and when any slaves are liberated they are taken to
Frere Town, as you already know."

"The Arabs set the various tribes to warring against each other," said
the Doctor, who had been a listener to the colloquy between the youths,
"and were always ready to buy prisoners no matter from which side they
were taken. It was estimated that for every slave that reached a market,
at least four persons were killed or perished in one way or another.
Many were killed in the attacks upon the villages, many of those who
escaped captivity perished of hunger in the forest or deserts where they
fled for refuge, and of those carried away as slaves, not half ever
reached the coast. They died on the road, of hunger or fatigue, or were
killed by their owners in consequence of their inability to travel."

"Did the Arabs sometimes leave the weak and sickly ones by the roadside,
when they were unable to keep up with the caravans, or did they always
kill them?" Fred inquired.

"Sometimes they left them to die or recover, as best they might, and Dr.
Livingstone tells how he saw groups of dying people with slave-yokes
about their necks, near the road where he travelled. Some of the
slave-traders were tender-hearted enough not to take life wantonly, but
this was not always the case. Those who looked upon the dreadful traffic
purely in the light of business made it a rule to kill every slave who
could not keep up with the caravan. They did so not from any special
delight in the killing, but because it spurred the survivors on to
endure the hardships of the march, and never to yield as long as there
was power to drag one foot before the other. Sometimes they tied the
unfortunate ones to trees and left them to perish; Dr. Livingstone came
frequently upon instances of this barbarity of the Arab slave-dealers."

[Illustration: SLAVES LEFT TO DIE.]

"The people had thus a double incentive to learn how to make war," the
Doctor continued, "as soon as the Arabs began to come among them. They
endeavored to capture each other, as a matter of gain, and then they
wanted to defend their homes and themselves. They became very jealous of
the advent of strangers, and thus it came about that travellers needed
much larger escorts than formerly. Strange to say, they had no
particular desire to stop the slave-trade, and they readily listened to
the Arabs, who told them that the presence of Englishmen in the country
would interfere with the traffic. Of course the weak and small tribes
suffered most by the Arab devastation; the strong tribes found the
slave-trade profitable, and thus all the influence was in favor of its
continuance. Along the coast towns of Africa, and in the interior
districts, you will find many a chief who mourns the day when the
foreigners put a stop to the slave-trade, and thus interfered with an
industry which he had found profitable.

"And now," he remarked, "we will return to Mr. Thomson and his journey
into Masai Land. Frank has the floor."

Thus appealed to, Frank went on with his story.

"After passing the fertile belt along the coast, the expedition entered
a desert region where the sun was so hot, shade so scanty, and water so
scarce, that it was necessary to make all the marches during the night.
The men suffered terribly from thirst, as the most of them, with
characteristic African improvidence, drank up in an hour or so the
supply of water which had been intended for two days. One night Mr.
Thomson started out to find water, as his people were in a desperate
condition. He found no water, but lost his way and was unable to return
to camp. He says it was the first time he was ever lost in the desert; a
feeling of awe took possession of him and he saw lions in every bush.
Very soon he heard the roar of a lion, and then his sensations were
exceedingly uncomfortable. He wandered aimlessly about; he fired his gun
repeatedly, but heard no response. At last he was about to lie down, in
despair, when he heard the sound of a gun to which he responded with his
last remaining cartridge. Following the direction whence the sound came,
he met a search-party that had gone to find him. When he reached camp he
had been eighteen hours on his feet, without food and with very little
water."

"And what did his people do without water?" Fred inquired.

"Water was found the next day," Frank explained, "but not until some of
the men had so broken down that they could not go farther, and it was
necessary to send water to revive them. After passing the desert belt
they entered a mountain region, where water was abundant and the
natives were friendly. It is the region of the Wa-teita, and consists of
a series of slopes around the Ndara Mountain. The Wa-teita have herds of
cattle, sheep, and goats, they raise Indian corn, sugar-cane, bananas,
sweet potatoes, and similar articles, and have been able to resist the
attacks of the Masai, chiefly through the security of their position and
their skill in the use of the bow and arrow. The Church Missionary
Society has a station among this people, and the natives appear to take
kindly to his instruction.

[Illustration: A SPRING IN THE DESERT.]

"Mr. Thomson gives an interesting account of the Wa-teita women, who
anoint themselves with oil, from head to foot, and would consider their
toilet incomplete without it. They pull out their eyelashes and
eyebrows, file their teeth into points, and then cover their necks with
string upon string of beads, so that they can hardly turn their heads.
On neck, shoulders, and waist, a belle of the Wa-teita carries from
twenty to thirty pounds' weight of beads, and it is needless to say that
beads are an important article of commerce among the traders who go from
the coast to that country.

"When a man of the Wa-teita wishes to marry he arranges the
preliminaries with the girl's father, and agrees to pay a certain number
of cows. As soon as the bargain is completed the girl runs away, and
hides among distant relatives until such time as her betrothed can find
her hiding-place, and catch her. Then he engages some of his friends,
who carry her home on their shoulders, with a great deal of singing and
dancing. When they reach home the bridal couple are shut up in their
house for three days, without food; at the end of that time the bride is
carried to her father's house by a party of girls, and after a while
returns to the home of her husband and the ceremonies are over.

[Illustration: A WEDDING-DANCE.]

"Leaving this region, the expedition passed through a belt of forest,
and came, at length, near the base of Mount Kilimanjaro, the famous
Mount Olympus of Africa, already mentioned. Perhaps Doctor Bronson will
tell us something about it, as he has been reading Mr. Johnston's book,
describing the exploration to it."

"A very interesting book it is, though less so to the general reader
than to the scientific one. Mr. Johnston is, as you know, a naturalist,
and the principal part of the book is devoted to his special line of
study. The English Royal Geographical Society paid the expenses of the
expedition, and instructed Mr. Johnston to reside in the vicinity of the
mountain for at least six months, and make collections of the floral,
animal, and other products of the region, as close to the snow-line as
was conveniently possible."

"From that I suppose that the mountain is capped with snow," Fred
remarked, as the doctor paused a moment.

"Yes," was the reply, "Kilimanjaro has an elevation of 18,880 feet, and
is covered with snow throughout the year. The mountain has two peaks;
Kibo, the higher of these peaks, has the elevation I mentioned, while
the other--Kimawenzi--attains an altitude of 16,250 feet. These peaks
are in the centre of a mass of surrounding mountains, but none of the
others reach above the snow-line. Both Kibo and Kimawenzi are the
craters of extinct volcanoes, and the whole region round about was
evidently thrown up by volcanic or earthquake action, ages and ages ago.
In a direct line the great mountain is about one hundred and
seventy-five miles from the coast, but by the tortuous lines of African
travel the distance is considerably more than two hundred miles.

"Mr. Johnston arrived in Zanzibar on his way to Kilimanjaro in April,
1884, and after some delay in outfitting his expedition took the route
by way of Mombasa. His troubles with porters and natives were similar to
those of Mr. Thomson, so that a repetition of his story is unnecessary.
He relates that on several occasions his camp was surrounded with lions
at night, and though the brutes did no damage, they kept up a tremendous
roaring which effectually prevented all sleeping. One night the roar was
continuous, and the voices of no less than ten of these animals were
counted; on the next morning the tracks in the soft earth around the
camp indicated that a whole troop of lions had been present. Mr.
Johnston noticed that whenever a lion was approaching the camp, and
before he had given warning of his presence by a roar, the birds in the
trees set up a nervous twittering. The approach of other wild beasts at
night was notified in the same way.

"The slopes of Kilimanjaro between the elevations of three thousand and
seven thousand feet are occupied by an agricultural people; their chief
is called Mandara and the name of the country is Chaga. Through his
intimacy with the Arab slave-dealers Mandara had become avaricious, and
exacted a heavy tribute from Mr. Johnston, as he had from previous
visitors. The explorer described the monarch as about five feet eleven
inches in height, of dignified bearing and fine figure. He looked more
like a North American Indian than a native-born African, as his
cheek-bones were high and his nose hooked, while his mouth was broad and
thin-lipped and his chin rounded and resolute. The lobes of his ears had
been bored and distended so that each contained a ring of wood three or
four inches in diameter. The custom of boring the ears and subsequently
distending them prevails in Chaga, and very often the distended lobe
almost touches the shoulder of its owner.

"Mr. Johnston purchased a site for his plantation after some bargaining,
and then settled down to work. Mandara presented the stranger with a cow
and some goats and sheep, the Zanzibari porters built houses, a kitchen
garden was started with a great variety of seeds of the tropical and
temperate zones, and before a week had passed the explorer was eating a
salad of his own growing. At first he was greatly annoyed by the
attendants of Mandara's court, who came daily to him on begging
excursions. He suspected that they were sent by the chief, but assumed
in an interview with that dignitary that such was not the case. By a
little diplomacy he managed to win the monarch's favor, at least for a
time, and compel his annoyers to stay away.

[Illustration: MANDARA'S LEFT EAR.]

"He found the nights cool at the elevation where his plantation was
situated; at daylight the temperature was a little above fifty degrees,
but it rose steadily with the sun as the day advanced. The air was pure
and dry, and Mr. Johnston says that but for the occasional troubles with
his neighbors the life on the mountain slope would have been delightful.
On certain days the natives held markets, at which he bought various
supplies for his people; he rarely did any purchasing himself, but left
the business to his head men, as the natives invariably sought to cheat
him in bargaining.

"Mr. Johnston had brought two men from Zanzibar to assist him in
collecting birds and plants, but they proved of no use, and had to be
discharged and sent back to the coast. Consequently all the labor of
collecting fell upon himself, and he was very actively employed during
every day of his stay in Chaga. He had a great deal of trouble with
Mandara, who begged constantly for anything he wanted, and would have
soon reduced his visitor to a condition of beggary. At one time he cut
off all supplies of food, forbidding his people to sell anything to the
strangers, and placing a cordon of fighting-men around Mr. Johnston's
settlement to make sure that his orders were obeyed. He finally became
so troublesome that the explorer moved his camp to another district,
where the chief was more amiable, though not less inclined to beg."

[Illustration: A CORNER OR MR. JOHNSTON'S SETTLEMENT.]

"Did he get to the summit of the mountain?" one of the youths inquired.

"No," said the Doctor, "he was unable to ascend to the top, but on two
occasions he reached the snow-line, at a height of 16,315 feet, which
was higher than any of the natives had ever been. As the height by
survey is estimated at 18,880 feet, he was within about twenty-five
hundred feet of the desired point. Vegetation ends at 15,000 feet, and
from that point to the snow-line the mountain consists of large
boulders, broken rocks, and sand. Mr. Johnston says the ascent as far as
he went is quite easy when compared with that of other great mountains
of the world, but he was not properly equipped for the effort, and his
men were unwilling to tempt the demons that are supposed to occupy the
peak. He was bitterly disappointed at his inability to gaze into the
extinct crater of Kilimanjaro, and was obliged to leave that honor for
some future traveller.

"By the end of six months in the country around the great mountain he
was out of funds, and, as money is needed for living in Africa quite as
much as in any other part of the world, he was obliged to return to
Zanzibar. On the road to the coast he encountered a band of the dreaded
Masai warriors, and for a short time was in great danger of an attack.
How he prevented it is best told in his own words:

     "They called on two or three of our men to advance and confer with
     them, so KiongwÃ©, Ibrahim, and Bakari went. After asking various
     questions as to who I was, where I came from, and whither I was
     going, the Masai leader inquired, 'Had we any sickness?' This query
     aroused a happy but sadly unveracious thought in my mind. 'Tell
     him,' I said to KiongwÃ©, in Swahili, a language the Masai do not
     understand, 'tell him we have small-pox.' KiongwÃ© grasped the idea
     and said to the Masai captain, with well-feigned vexation, 'Yes, we
     have a man suffering from the white disease' (the Masai name for
     small-pox). 'Show him,' the leader replied, at the same time moving
     several yards off. I immediately dragged forward an Albino, who was
     a porter in my caravan--a wretched pink-and-white creature, with
     tow-colored hair and mottled skin. The Masai at once exclaimed,
     'Oh, this is a bad disease--look! it has turned the poor man
     white!' Then he shouted out that he had no wish to interfere with
     us, nor would they take anything from our infected goods. One
     concession alone they asked, and this we readily granted, which was
     that we would not follow too closely on their footsteps lest they
     might get our 'wind' and catch the disease. And with this they
     turned around, rejoined their fellows, called up their herd of cows
     and donkeys, and slowly wended their way up the hilly path. In half
     an hour's time the last Masai had disappeared, and we saw no more
     of them."

"And now," remarked the Doctor, "as we have seen Mr. Johnston safely on
his return from the exploration of Kilimanjaro and the ascent of that
famous mountain, let us return to Mr. Thomson and his journey to Masai
Land."

Under this hint Frank proceeded:

[Illustration: VIEW OF KILIMANJARO.]

"We left Mr. Thomson among the Wa-teita people near the base of Mount
Kilimanjaro," said the youth, "and from there he went to Chaga and to
the court of the chief Mandara. Very unwisely he showed his property to
Mandara, who immediately coveted nearly everything, and managed to
squeeze out a great deal by way of tribute. The explorer did not tarry
long with this exacting ruler, but pushed on as speedily as possible in
the direction of the Masai. On the threshold of their country he met a
band of warriors and, somewhat to his surprise, was hospitably received,
though not until he had gone through an elaborate ceremony by which he
and the chief of the band were made blood brothers. The amount of
tribute he was to pay was then negotiated, and, unhappily for him, it
proved very heavy.

"The good feeling only lasted a short time, as the news was received
that a German expedition which had entered the country a few days before
had had a fight with the Masai, and blood had been shed on both sides.
The whole country rose in arms against the Englishman, and he was forced
to retreat across the border. In the middle of the night he left his
camp, his men moving in perfect silence and very fearful lest one of
their donkeys should bray and thus show that the caravan was stealing
away. Fortunately the animals followed the silent example of their
masters, and the retreat was safely accomplished.

[Illustration: CAMP SCENE.]

"Leaving his men in camp in a safe place, Mr. Thomson returned to the
coast to obtain a fresh stock of goods with which to attempt again a
journey through Masai Land. On his return he had the good-fortune to
find a large caravan belonging to some coast traders who were going in
his direction, and after a little negotiation he arranged to join his
forces with theirs. Thus he was comparatively secure from danger of
attack by the Masai, but on the other hand his movements were dependent
on those of the traders, who are never in a hurry as long as there is
anything to be made by remaining in camp. On such occasions he devoted
himself to hunting, and as the country abounded in game he found enough
to do. Elephants, zebras, several varieties of antelopes, lions,
leopards, and smaller game fell before his rifle, together with several
rhinoceroses and buffaloes. He emphatically avows that he shot these
animals only for food and not for the mere sport of killing. The meat
thus obtained frequently kept his camp supplied for days and days
together.

"Mr. Thomson," Fred continued, "is enthusiastic in his description of
the Masai warriors whom he first encountered. The elders of the tribe
came fearlessly into camp notwithstanding that in the previous year they
had attacked nearly every caravan that entered the country, and on one
occasion stabbed about forty porters without the least provocation. He
says they were magnificent specimens of their race, considerably over
six feet in height, and with an aristocratic dignity that filled the
Englishman with admiration. They referred to the attacks upon the
caravans as the most trivial circumstances, and said it was only because
the young warriors wanted to taste blood just to keep themselves in
practice. Their language was equivalent to the old adage that 'boys will
be boys, and their wild oats must be sown.' The debate ended peacefully
and, luckily for the strangers, nearly all the fighting-men were at that
time away on a cattle-stealing expedition.

"The Masai people had a great horror of being photographed, as they
supposed the camera was a bewitching machine which would work them great
harm. Mr. Thomson came near getting into trouble by shooting a marabout
stork which he saw near the camp. It seems that storks and adjutants are
looked upon as sacred; as they, along with the hyenas, are the
grave-diggers, or rather the graves of the Masai. These people do not
bury or burn their dead, but simply throw out the corpses to be
devoured, in much the same way as the Parsees of Bombay carry their dead
to the Towers of Silence on Malabar Hill to be eaten by vultures.

"The hunting was so good in the neighborhood of this camp that in one
day our friend 'bagged' four rhinoceroses, one giraffe, four zebras,
and four antelopes, all within six hours. He saw the tracks of elephants
and buffaloes, but did not kill any; though a hunter from the traders'
camp managed to kill an elephant whose tusks weighed a little short of
two hundred pounds. The Masai people proved to be inveterate thieves,
and, in spite of the greatest precautions, not a day passed without the
loss of more or less property which the light-fingered scoundrels
managed to lay their hands on. Mr. Thomson was looked upon as a
wonderful worker of magic, but even the respect that was due him as a
magician did not prevent the people from stealing his goods.

[Illustration: AFRICAN ADJUTANTS.]

"On the road the Masai used to rush up to the caravan singly or in twos
or threes and attempt to carry off the loads from the porters' heads; if
they failed no effort was made to punish them; and if they succeeded
they were not pursued to any great distance, as their friends would be
sure to come to their rescue. At night the camp was surrounded by a
stockade or a fence of thorns, and several times the Masai attempted to
enter the stockades and stampede the animals belonging to the caravan.
Hostile demonstrations were numerous, and escapes from fights
exceedingly narrow.

[Illustration: A WELL-STOCKED HUNTING-GROUND.]

"At a convenient point on the road Mr. Thomson left the caravan
temporarily, to make a flying trip to Mount Kenia with a selected party
of his best men. He kept up his character of magician, and, by an
ingenious ruse with his teeth (two of which were false), he carried
conviction with his assertion. 'Come to me,' he said to one of the
wondering warriors, 'and I will cut off your nose and put it on again.
Just look at my teeth; see how firm they are,' and as he said so he
tapped them with his knuckles. 'Now I turn my head and, see, the teeth
are gone;' and the crowd shrank back in dismay and was on the point of
seeking safety in flight. 'Hold on a moment,' said the white magician,
and with another turn of the head he put the teeth in place and stood
smiling before the petrified spectators.

"He says his artificial teeth were perfect treasures to him, and
doubtless to their aid he owed his safety. But he was obliged to keep up
his exhibition so frequently that it soon became a nuisance. His man
Martin pretended also to be a magician, and told one of the Masai women
that he could cut off his finger and restore it immediately. As he
extended the finger the woman suddenly seized it and half bit it off,
which raised a howl from Martin, and caused him for the future to make
no further boasts of his magical skill.

[Illustration: PLAIN AND MOUNTAINS IN MASAI LAND.]

"The expedition reached the foot of Mount Kenia, but all thought of
ascending it had to be given up, as the Masai were very troublesome and
food was scarce. The mountain is thought to be a little more than
eighteen thousand feet high, and its summit is covered with snow. Like
its great neighbor to the south, it is believed to be an extinct
volcano. In fact, the proofs of its former character are clearly shown
in beds of lava and frequent traces of volcanic action. Up to a height
of fifteen thousand feet its slope is very gentle, but after that it
rises in a sharp cone almost like a sugar-loaf, and would be exceedingly
difficult of ascent. The slope of the peak is so steep that the snow
slides off in places and reveals the rocks, and to this circumstance
Kenia owes its Masai name of Donyo EgÃ©rÃ© or 'Speckled Mountain.'

"With various adventures and narrow escapes Mr. Thomson pushed his
exploration to the shore of the Victoria Nyanza, which he reached about
forty miles to the east of the outlet of the lake. Near the lake he
found a people unlike the Masai, as they had a decidedly negro type of
countenance. The Masai have very little to identify them with the negro,
and Mr. Thomson says they can in no sense be called negroes. In their
cranial development, as in their language, they are widely different
from the natives of Central and Southern Africa, and occupy a far higher
position in the scale of humanity.

"The Masai people are divided into some ten or twelve tribes, and these
tribes or clans have many smaller divisions. Some are more aristocratic
than others, and there is hardly a time when two or more of them are not
indulging in war. Some of these wars have resulted in the almost
complete destruction of the defeated tribes, and the expulsion of the
remnant from the country; the defeated ones becoming peaceful and
orderly, and the victors more insolent than ever. The boys in all the
fighting tribes are trained to war; they live apart from the families
and are under the control of a leader who is elected by ballot, has the
power of life and death over his subjects, settles disputes, and may be
turned out of office whenever he becomes unpopular with the majority.

"The clothing of a Masai boy consists of a coating of grease and clay
rubbed over his skin. When he becomes old enough he is equipped with a
bow and arrows with which he practises upon small animals, and
occasionally upon his playmates. Great care is taken in the distension
of the lobes of his ears, which are nursed as carefully as the budding
mustache of more civilized lands. A slender stick is thrust through the
lobe, then a larger one is inserted, and the process is continued until
a piece of ivory six inches long can be inserted endwise.

"When the boy blossoms into a warrior he is equipped with a spear having
a blade thirty inches long, a short sword, and a knob-stick; the latter
intended for throwing at an advancing enemy, or crushing the skull of a
disabled one on the ground. All these weapons are made by an inferior
tribe that lives in the land of the Masai, and is compelled to do their
menial work; from another tribe of the same low grade the Masai purchase
their shields, as they never make their own. The markings and adornments
on a shield show to what tribe or clan its owner belongs.

"When going to war a Masai removes the stretchers from his ears and
substitutes a tassel of iron rings, or something of the sort; covers his
shoulders with a mantle of kite's feathers; winds a strip of cotton
about his neck, and allows it to wave behind him as he runs; places his
sword and knob-stick in his belt; anoints his body with grease and clay;
decorates his legs with streamers of the long hair of the colobus
monkey, so that he suggests the Winged Mercury. On his head is a
remarkable contrivance formed of ostrich feathers, stuck into a band of
leather and fastened around the face in an elliptical shape. His
armament is completed by his spear and shield, and thus arrayed he is
ready for business, and a very troublesome fellow he is, according to
all accounts.

[Illustration: EAR-STRETCHERS AND EAR-ORNAMENTS.]

"Making war, stealing cattle from other tribes, plundering caravans, and
similar predatory performances make up the life of a Masai warrior. When
a man marries he gives up fighting and settles down into domestic ways,
and thus it happens that all the warriors in Masai land are single men.
Mr. Thomson says the Masai women are the handsomest of their sex in all
Africa; they are slender and graceful, and distinctly ladylike both in
manner and physique. They are dressed in bullock's hides, from which the
hair has been scraped; their heads are shaved smooth, and sometimes
their faces are painted white."

"I have read somewhere," said Fred, "that they wear great quantities of
wire, the same as did the women of Chumbiri described by Mr. Stanley on
the Congo."

[Illustration: A MASAI WARRIOR.]

"That is true," Frank replied, "and the amount of wire worn by the Masai
women is something wonderful. Telegraph wire is coiled around the lower
limbs from the knees to the ankles, and around the arms both above and
below the elbow. Round the neck more wire is coiled; it is arranged in a
horizontal shape, so that the head seems to be sticking up through an
inverted platter. The wire is put on when the women are young and is
never removed, consequently the limbs present a withered appearance, the
legs being of a uniform size from the ankle to the knee. The weight of
iron wire worn by a Masai woman varies from ten to thirty pounds; in
addition to this, she carries great quantities of beads and iron chains
around her neck.

[Illustration: MASAI MARRIED WOMAN, WITH PAINTED FACE.]

"It seems almost a wonder," Frank continued, "that Mr. Thomson with his
small party was able to make his way safely through Masai Land and back
to the coast, as he did."

"Perhaps it is a greater wonder," said Fred, "that Bishop Hannington,
whose life I have been reading, a man of the most amiable disposition,
went through Masai Land unharmed, to meet his death at the hands of
Mwanga, the King of Uganda."

"How did it happen that he ventured there?"

"Because," was the reply, "he had been once to Uganda by the same route
that Mr. Stanley followed, and the bishop found that route very
unhealthy, and became so ill that he was sent back before reaching
Rubaga. When he started again for Uganda, in the early part of 1885, he
decided upon going through Masai Land, as the route was much shorter and
the country far less swampy and pestiferous. The only perils were from
the terrible Masai; they repeatedly barred his way, and several times
were on the point of attacking his caravan, but, by a determined but
gentle bearing, he managed to prevent actual hostilities. Some of his
property was stolen in spite of all watchfulness, but there was no
bloodshed on either side.

"When the caravan was within fifty miles of Lake Victoria and all danger
was supposed to be passed, Bishop Hannington decided to leave the
caravan in camp and proceed with fifty of his followers to the lake,
whence he would send word to the king of his approach. When he was near
the Ripon Falls of the Victoria Nile he was imprisoned by a band of
armed men and kept a close prisoner in a hut until word could be sent to
the king. After an imprisonment of eight days he was killed in
compliance with the king's orders."

"Why did the king wish to put him to death?" Frank inquired.

"The king, who had but recently succeeded to the throne of his father
Mtesa, was only eighteen years of age, and easily swayed by his
councillors. The latter were afraid of the influence of the Europeans,
as they foresaw the ultimate destruction of their power through the
advent of the strangers; they worked upon the young king and aroused his
jealousy, and easily persuaded him to take severe measures. The natives
who had become converted to Christianity were put to death or otherwise
maltreated, no less than thirty being bound together and placed on a
pile of wood where they were burned alive on account of their religion.
The missionaries were imprisoned, all teaching of religion was
prohibited, and the prospect was gloomy.

"The old king, Mtesa, was always opposed to the exploration of Masai
Land, and did not like the idea of Europeans coming to his dominions
from that direction. His son and all the councillors had the same
feeling, and it is now known that when Mr. Thomson reached the shore of
the lake by that route he was in greater danger than he had supposed.
The chief of the region bordering the lake was severely reprimanded and
removed from office because he failed to bind the white man and send him
a prisoner to Rubaga.

"Just as the bishop was approaching Uganda by the Masai route, news came
to the king that the Germans had seized some ports on the east coast of
Africa and were about to take possession of all the country up to the
shores of Lake Victoria. This information created great alarm, as it
foreboded an advance of the white men in that direction; while it was
under discussion Bishop Hannington reached the shore of the lake, and
notice of his arrival was sent to the king.

"From the Ugandan point of view all white men were alike, and all were
at that time dangerous to the liberties of the country. After a short
deliberation with his councillors the king gave orders that the bishop
should be put to death; he had advocated sending him back to the coast,
but was easily persuaded to the severer course.

"The manner of his death is thus told by his biographer:

     "He was conducted to an open space without the village, and found
     himself surrounded once more by his own men. With a wild shout the
     warriors fell upon his helpless caravan men, and their flashing
     spears soon covered the ground with the dead and dying. In that
     supreme moment we have the happiness of knowing that the bishop
     faced his destiny like a Christian and a man. As the soldiers told
     off to murder him closed round he made one last use of that
     commanding mien which never failed to secure for him the respect of
     the most savage. Drawing himself up he looked around, and as they
     momentarily hesitated with poised weapons he spoke a few words
     which graved themselves upon their memories and which they
     afterwards repeated just as they were heard. He bade them tell the
     king that he was about to die for the B-a-ganda, and that he had
     purchased the road to Buganda with his life. Then, as they still
     hesitated, he pointed to his own gun, which one of them discharged,
     and the great and noble spirit leaped forth from its broken house
     of clay and entered with exceeding joy into the presence of the
     King."

[Illustration: UGANDA HEAD-DRESS.]

"The death of Bishop Hannington and the imprisonment of the missionaries
at the capital of Uganda has by no means stopped the work of the London
mission societies," the Doctor remarked, as Fred concluded the reading
of the foregoing quotation. "For a time it has been suspended in Uganda,
but the effort at Christianizing Africa is being vigorously pushed
elsewhere. New stations are being opened every year, and I have just
read in a newspaper that a small steamboat will soon be placed on the
Victoria Nyanza. It is to be called the _James Hannington_, in memory of
the hero missionary, and will no doubt be of great use in bringing the
people of Central Africa to a knowledge of the ways and works of
civilization."

[Illustration: PLACE WHERE BISHOP HANNINGTON WAS IMPRISONED AND
KILLED.]




CHAPTER XXI.

STANLEY'S HUNTING ADVENTURES.--AFRICA THE FIELD FOR THE
SPORTSMAN.--HUNTING IN SOUTH AFRICA.--NIGHT-SHOOTING AT WATER-HOLES AND
SPRINGS.--ABUNDANCE OF GAME.--DANGER OF THIS KIND OF SPORT.--LIONS AND
ELEPHANTS.--MAN-EATING LIONS.--IN THE JAWS OF A LION.--DR. LIVINGSTONE'S
NARROW ESCAPE.--THE HOPO, OR GAME-TRAP ON A LARGE SCALE.--DU CHAILLU AND
HIS ADVENTURES.--SHOOTING THE GORILLA.--RESEMBLANCE OF THE GORILLA TO
MAN.--PRODIGIOUS STRENGTH OF THE GORILLA.--HOW HE IS HUNTED.--THE END.


[Illustration: AFRICAN ORYX, OR GEMSBOK.]

One day while our friends were discussing "Through the Dark Continent"
and considering its admirable qualities as a book of travel, Frank
remarked that there were few volumes of African exploration which had so
little to say about hunting adventures. "I suppose the reason may be
found," he continued, "in the fact that Mr. Stanley was too busy with
his work of ascertaining the characteristics of the country and people
to give time to hunting. Occasionally he shot game to supply his people
with meat, but in telling the story of his few shooting experiences he
is exceedingly brief."

[Illustration: SOUTH AFRICAN HUNTING--IN CAMP.]

"Not only was he greatly occupied with his work as an explorer," replied
the Doctor, "but he had a positive aversion to shedding the blood of
animals, not even excepting the noxious ones. If a lion came in his way
or threatened the safety of his camp he was ready enough to shoot it,
but he did not have the craving for slaughter that leads a man to tramp
all day through a forest or over hills, or sit through the night in a
desolate spot for the mere pleasure of taking a shot at anything that
happens along. Many African explorers have more to say about their
hunting experiences than anything else, and I have now in mind the book
of an explorer who gives minute details concerning all the large animals
that fell before his rifle, but has very little to say about the country
and its inhabitants.

"For the hunter in search of large game Africa is now the best field,
but owing to the rapid increase in the number of hunters, the growing
use of firearms by the natives, and the colonization of hitherto
unsettled regions, the great animals are becoming shy and scarce. South
Africa was and still is a favorite resort of sportsmen, but every year
they must go farther and farther into the wilderness before finding what
they seek."

"How do they get up their hunting expeditions?" Fred asked.

"The usual plan," replied the Doctor, "is to fit out one or two wagons
with provisions, guns, ammunition, and trade goods for several months,
and then strike into the wilderness away from all settlements. Two or
three saddle-horses, together with donkeys, oxen, cows, and sheep,
constitute the live-stock of the expedition. In Central Africa it would
be impossible to travel with wagons, owing to the dense vegetation and
the condition of the country, which is full of swamps and morasses, but
in South Africa the circumstances are different. The country is not
densely wooded, and in many parts it is absolutely treeless. Sometimes
water is found there with difficulty, and every volume of hunting
adventures in South Africa contains stories of the sufferings of men and
animals through scarcity or absence of water. But this scarcity of water
greatly facilitates the work of the hunter."

"How is that?"

"Where the springs and water-holes are far apart the wild animals must
go long distances to drink, and if the hunter watches in their
neighborhood he will have plenty of what he calls 'sport.' A favorite
plan of these African hunters is to conceal themselves near a spring and
shoot the elephants, lions, and other large beasts as they come for
water."

"That ought to be very easy," said one of the youths.

"Not as easy as you might suppose," was the reply, "nor is it without
danger. In the first place very few of the animals visit the springs in
the daytime, their drinking being done at night. Furthermore, they
choose the hours when there is no moon, and thus reduce the chance of
being seen. In the moonless part of a month they come at any hour
between darkness and daylight, but usually about midnight; on the nights
when the moon shines they select the hours when it is below the horizon.
Thus if the moon rises early they wait until it has set, and if it rises
late they come to drink before it is above the horizon. One hunter says
that if it had not been for this habit there is many a lion, rhinoceros,
or elephant now roaming the forests of South Africa that would have
fallen before his rifle. He says he has frequently heard a lion lapping
the water within a dozen paces of him when the night was so dark that he
could not get a sight of the brute."

"Do all the wild animals of Africa observe this rule?"

"None of them do so absolutely, and some are more observant of it than
others. But all seem to know that there is danger near their
drinking-places, and they conduct themselves accordingly.

[Illustration: NIGHT HUNTING. ELEPHANTS COMING TO DRINK.]

"A great deal depends upon the selection of the spot for concealment,
and in making his selection the hunter has many things to think of. He
must carefully observe the direction of the wind and make sure that it
blows towards him from the places whence the animals approach the
drinking-spot. Then, if possible, he must so station himself that
elephants, giraffes, and other large animals will be outlined against
the sky as they come within his range. He digs a pit three or four feet
deep and surrounds it with brushwood so that the change of the ground is
not likely to be noticed. Sometimes there is a convenient ant-hill close
to the drinking-place, and if so this forms an excellent shooting-box,
as the animals are familiar with its appearance and therefore are not
likely to suspect that it conceals anything dangerous.

[Illustration: AN AFRICAN SERENADE.]

"One famous hunter, Andersson, gives it as his opinion that a night
ambush beside an African pool, frequented by large animals, is worth all
other modes of enjoying a gun put together. Other hunters express the
same opinion, though some of them admit that it is a cruel sort of
sport, as it takes the prey wholly unawares and with little chance for
defence or escape. The peril of this sort of hunting is that sometimes
an elephant, rhinoceros, or lion discovers whence came the shot that
wounded him, and charges directly at the spot. In such a case the
hunter in his pit is at a disadvantage, and his chief hope of safety is
by a well-directed bullet when his assailant is within short range.
Sometimes a wounded or frightened elephant runs straight to the spot, in
his terror, and is liable to kill the hunter by tumbling upon him. There
is one instance I have read of, wherein an elephant ran directly over
the hunter, who was lying flat on the ground; the great feet of the
animal grazed the head of his would-be slayer, but did not harm him. Had
the elephant been less frightened he would have made short work of the
man."

"Is a lion more dangerous than an elephant in a case of this kind?"
asked one of the youths.

[Illustration: CLOSE SHAVE BY AN ELEPHANT.]

"There is not much to choose between them," Doctor Bronson answered, "as
both are to be dreaded, perhaps the lion more than the larger animal.
Neither the lion nor the elephant will attack man without provocation,
but when wounded they are very likely to turn upon their assailants. The
courage of the lion has been greatly overrated in story-books, and also
his noble conduct. The hunters who have made his intimate acquaintance,
and written about him, say his characteristics are much like those of
the hyena, and, like the latter beast, he is a skulking rather than an
honorable foe. The female accompanied by her young is apt to be
dangerous, but as for the male lion it can be set down as pretty certain
that he will retire from danger if he has a chance to do so, even at the
expense of his dignity."

"Haven't I read of lions watching by the roadside and killing men and
women without provocation?" said Fred.

[Illustration: DEATH-GRAPPLE WITH A LION.]

"Undoubtedly you have," was the reply. "The lions thus described are the
dreaded man-eaters, who rank with the man-eating tigers of India. Having
once tasted human flesh and learned how easily it is procured, they lie
in wait by the roads and paths, and spring upon the unfortunates who
come within their reach. A man-eating lion will pass through an entire
herd of cattle to get at one of the herdsmen; his movements are as
stealthy as those of the cat, and the victim never has the least warning
of his enemy's approach. Very properly he is the subject of dread, and
when a man-eater appears in the neighborhood of a settlement, large
rewards are offered for his head. Sometimes there is an entire
suspension of work and business until the man-eater has been killed or
driven away. These man-eaters have been known to come into a camp,
spring upon a man asleep by the side of his companions, drag him into
the bushes, and deliberately kill and devour him under protection of the
darkness. While the lion, under ordinary circumstances, is not an object
of any especial dread on the part of hunters, all have a terror of the
man-eater.

"You never know, when you attack a lion, whether he will slink away or
turn upon you; and every African hunter can tell stories of narrow
escapes. As an illustration I will repeat one that was told to Mr.
Andersson by the hero of it.

"He had gone out with some of his friends in search of five lions that
had broken into his cattle-enclosure the previous night. The lions were
tracked to a thicket of reeds, which were set on fire, the hunters being
stationed around the thicket to intercept the animals as they came out.
One lion took the direction in which two of the hunters were stationed,
one of them being the narrator of the story.

"He fired, inflicting only a slight wound. Immediately the lion sprang
upon him; he thrust his gun into the lion's mouth, but the weapon was
demolished in an instant. 'At that moment,' said he, 'the other hunter
fired and the lion fell with a broken shoulder, so that I was able to
rise and scamper away. But the lion was not done with me; in spite of
his crippled condition he came after me, and my foot catching in a
creeper, I fell to the ground. He was upon me again, tearing my clothing
with his claws and grazing the skin in his efforts to grasp my hip. He
laid hold of my left wrist and crushed it, and he tore my right hand so
that I was totally helpless. Just as he had done this my friend came up
again, accompanied by his dog, which seized the lion by the leg and thus
drew his attention from me. My friend watched his chance and fired at
very close range; the ball crashed through the lion's skull and
stretched him on the ground by my side.' The mutilated hunter was
carried to camp, and eventually recovered from his wounds, but his left
wrist was permanently crippled.

"Doctor Livingstone was once in a similar peril," continued Doctor
Bronson, as he opened the account of the famous missionary's travels and
researches in South Africa. "Here is his account of the occurrence:

     "It is well known that if one of a troop of lions is killed the
     others take the hint and leave that part of the country. So, the
     next time the herds were attacked I went with the people in order
     to encourage them to rid themselves of the annoyance by destroying
     one of the marauders. We found the lions on a small hill, about a
     quarter of a mile in length and covered with trees. A circle of men
     was formed round it, and they gradually closed up, ascending pretty
     near each other. Being down below on the plain, with a native
     schoolmaster named Mebalwe, a most excellent man, I saw one of the
     lions sitting on a rock, within the now closed circle of men.
     Mebalwe fired at him before I could, and the ball struck the rock
     on which the animal was sitting. He bit at the spot struck, as a
     dog does at a stick or stone thrown at him; then, leaping away,
     broke through the opening circle and escaped unhurt. The men were
     afraid to attack him, perhaps on account of their belief in
     witchcraft.

     [Illustration: RHINOCEROS AND DOGS.]

     "When the circle was re-formed we saw two other lions in it; but we
     were afraid to fire lest we should strike the men, and they allowed
     the beasts to burst through also. Seeing we could not get the
     people to kill one of the lions we bent our steps towards the
     village; in going round the end of the hill, however, I saw one of
     the beasts sitting on a piece of rock as before, but he had a
     little bush in front. Being about thirty yards off, I took a good
     aim at his body, through the bush, and fired both barrels into it.
     The men then called out, 'He is shot! he is shot!' I saw the lion's
     tail erected in anger behind the bush, and, turning to the people,
     said, 'Stop a little, till I load again.' When in the act of
     ramming down the bullets I heard a shout.

     [Illustration: DR. LIVINGSTONE IN THE LION'S GRASP.]

     "Starting and looking half round, I saw the lion just in the act of
     springing upon me. I was upon a little height; he caught my
     shoulder as he sprang, and we both came to the ground below
     together. Growling horribly, he shook me as a terrier dog does a
     rat. The shock produced a stupor similar to that which seems to be
     felt by a mouse after the first shake of a cat. It caused a sort of
     dreaminess in which there was no sense of pain nor feeling of
     terror, though quite conscious of all that was happening. It was
     like what patients partially under the influence of chloroform
     describe, who see all the operation but feel not the knife. This
     singular condition was not the result of any mental process. The
     shake annihilated fear, and allowed no sense of horror in looking
     around at the beast. This peculiar state is probably produced in
     all animals killed by the carnivora; and, if so, it is a merciful
     provision by our benevolent Creator for lessening the pain of
     death.

     "Turning round to relieve myself of the weight, as he had one paw
     on the back of my head, I saw his eyes directed to Mebalwe, who was
     trying to shoot him at a distance of twelve or fifteen yards. His
     gun, a flint one, missed fire in both barrels; the lion immediately
     left me and, attacking Mebalwe, bit his thigh. Another man whose
     life I had saved before, after he had been tossed by a buffalo,
     attempted to spear the lion while he was biting Mebalwe. He left
     Mebalwe and caught this man by the shoulder, but at that moment the
     bullets he had received took effect, and he fell down dead. The
     whole was the work of a few moments, and must have been the
     paroxysms of his dying rage. Besides crushing the bone into
     splinters, he left eleven teeth wounds in the upper part of my
     arm."

"Dr. Livingstone resembled Mr. Stanley in having no special fondness for
hunting," continued Doctor Bronson, "and he has given us comparatively
few hunting adventures in the record of his explorations. He gives an
interesting account of the way the people of South Africa hunt game by
driving, in the seasons when water is scarce and the wild animals
congregate near the places where they can drink. They arrange two hedges
in the shape of the letter V, each hedge being a mile or two in length
and fully a mile across at the entrance. Then a large party of men go
out quietly, and move so as to drive the game into the opening. The
hedges are low at first, but as they approach each other they are
increased in strength, so that the animals cannot break through them.
The enclosure is called a 'hopo;' at its end there is a pit with a fall
of six or eight feet from the end of the hopo, so that the animals which
jump in cannot easily spring out again. Buffaloes, zebras, giraffes,
hartebeests, gnus, antelopes, oryxes, and similar animals are caught in
these pits; sometimes lions are driven in, but they can easily spring
over the hedges, and no attempt is made to stop them."

"That kind of hunting is not confined to South Africa, I believe," said
Frank.

[Illustration: THE HOPO, OR TRIP FOR DRIVING GAME.]

"Not by any means," was the reply; "it is known over pretty nearly the
whole world. It is used in India and Ceylon for trapping elephants, in
Australia for capturing kangaroos, and in other parts of the world for
other animals. Hunting by _battue_, or beating, is as old almost as man
himself, and has been practised in all ages; the chief difference
between the ordinary hunt by _battue_ and the capture of game in a hopo
is that in the latter instance the game is caught in a pit or enclosure,
while usually it is shot or otherwise killed as the lines of men are
drawn closely together. In many hunts of this sort the use of firearms
is forbidden on account of the danger of accidents, and where they are
permitted it is generally the rule to fire towards the outside of the
cordon of men and not towards the inside.

[Illustration: PAUL DU CHAILLU IN AFRICA.]

"One of the most famous hunters in Africa," said Doctor Bronson, after a
pause, "was Paul du Chaillu, who has written several books, interesting
alike to young and old. When he first published the account of his
adventures his stories were received with incredulity, but as Africa has
become better known the truth of his assertions has been made manifest.
He was the first white man to hunt the gorilla, and probably the first
who ever saw one of those animals. In the course of his explorations he
travelled some eight thousand miles, nearly always on foot and
unaccompanied by a white man.

[Illustration: GORILLA HUNTING--MOTHER AND YOUNG AT PLAY.]

"Nearly everywhere that he went he managed to get on friendly terms with
the natives, who had not then been contaminated by contact with the Arab
slave-hunters. Once his cook, whom he had brought from the coast,
attempted to poison him, and with this object put two spoonfuls of
arsenic in Du Chaillu's soup. The great overdose caused it to act as an
emetic, and thus the explorer's life was saved. The cook fled to the
woods when charged with the attempt to kill his master, but was caught
by the natives and sentenced to death. Du Chaillu interfered and saved
the fellow's life, and he was delivered in chains to the custody of his
brothers, who came to intercede for him.

"Du Chaillu tells of one tribe of natives on the African coast who
choose their chief or king by election, and may therefore be called
republicans. When a king dies his body is secretly buried, and there is
mourning for six days. During this time the old men meet to choose a new
king; the choice is made in private, and neither the people nor the new
king are informed of the result until the morning of the seventh day.
The information is kept from the man of their selection until the very
last.

"As soon as it is known who has been chosen the people surround him,
pound him with their fists or with sticks, throw all sorts of disgusting
objects at him, spit in his face, kick him, roll him on the ground, and
otherwise maltreat and abuse him. Those who cannot get at him by reason
of the crowd utter all sorts of uncomplimentary phrases, and they
anathematize not only him but all his relatives in every generation. Du
Chaillu thought the man's life was in real danger; but the secret of the
whole business was shown by some of the men occasionally shouting out,
'You are not our king yet; for a little while we will do what we please
with you. By and by we shall have to obey your will.'

"He is expected to endure all this with a smiling face and to keep his
temper throughout. When it has gone on for an hour or so he is taken to
the old king's house, where he is seated, and for a little while
receives a torrent of abuse, but this time it is entirely in words. Then
all become silent, the elders rise and say, the people repeating after
them:

"'Now we choose you for our king; we engage to listen to you and to obey
you.'

"Then the emblems of royalty are brought out, and the ceremonies of
coronation take place with the most profound dignity. The king is
dressed in a red gown and receives every mark of respect from those who
so lately abused him. After the coronation he must remain for six days
in the house, and during all this period there are loud rejoicings, and
all his subjects come to pay their respects. The old king was mourned
for six days, and it is considered nothing more than proper that the new
one should have six days of rejoicing. The fact is, the new one is
pretty nearly half dead at the end of the festival, as he is obliged to
receive all comers at any hour of day or night, and sit down and eat and
drink with them. Doubtless he is thoroughly happy when the festival is
over, and he can walk out and view his dominions.

[Illustration: DU CHAILLU'S FIRST GORILLA.]

"The explorer gives an interesting account of the gorilla, and his first
meeting with the animal makes a dramatic scene in his story. He had just
shot a snake, which his men devoured with delight, but our friend,
though very hungry, could not venture upon this sort of food.
Noticing some sugar-canes growing near, he proceeded to cut them, in
order to suck the juice and satisfy the cravings of his appetite.

[Illustration: HEAD OF KOOLOO-KAMBA.]

"As he was cutting the canes, assisted by his men, the latter called his
attention to several that had been broken down and chewed into fragments
while others had been torn up by the roots. It was evidently the work of
gorillas, and threw the whole party into a state of great excitement.
The tracks in the soft earth showed that there were several gorillas in
company, and immediately Du Chaillu proceeded to hunt them.

[Illustration: EAR OF KOOLOO-KAMBA.]

"He divided his men into two parties, one led by himself and the other
by an attendant named Makinda. The animals were supposed to be behind a
large rock, and the two parties moved so as to encircle it. Suddenly
there was a cry which had a very human sound, and four young gorillas
ran from the concealment of the rock towards the forest. He says they
ran on their hind-legs and looked wonderfully like hairy men as they
inclined their bodies forward, held their heads down, and to all
appearances were like men running for their lives to escape from danger.
Du Chaillu fired at them, but hit nothing, and the animals made good
their escape. The party ran after them till all were out of breath and
then returned to camp. He says he felt very much like a murderer, as the
animals had so nearly the appearance of humanity.

"Some days later he was more successful in hunting the gorilla. He was
out with his party, when suddenly the sound of the breaking of a branch
of a tree was heard. The natives intimated that they were near a
gorilla, and very cautiously all proceeded; soon they came in sight of
the huge beast breaking down the limbs and branches of the trees to get
at the berries. They stood still, as he was moving in their direction,
and in a little while he was right in front of them. He had moved
through the jungle on all fours, but as he came in sight of the party he
stood erect like a man.

[Illustration: DU CHAILLU ASCENDING AN AFRICAN RIVER.]

"Then he gave vent to a tremendous barking roar which is very difficult
to describe, and beat his breasts with his huge fists till they
resounded like drums. This is the gorilla's mode of offering defiance,
roaring and beating the breast at the same time. The roar begins with a
sharp bark, like that of an angry dog, then glides into a deep bass
roll, which literally and closely resembles the roll of distant thunder,
so that it is sometimes taken for it when the animal is not in sight.

"The gorilla was about twelve yards from Du Chaillu when he first
appeared; he advanced a few steps, then stopped and roared and beat his
breasts again, then made another advance and stopped about six yards
away. As he stopped a second time, Du Chaillu fired and killed him. The
shot was well aimed, and death was almost instantaneous. Measurement
showed that the animal was five feet eight inches in height, but when
standing erect, at his first appearance, he seemed to be fully six feet.

"During his wanderings in Africa Mr. Du Chaillu killed several gorillas,
whose skins and skeletons he preserved and sent to England and America,
where they attracted much attention in the scientific world. On two or
three occasions he was fortunate enough to capture some young gorillas
alive, but found it impossible to tame them. They showed the most
furious temper and bit at everybody who came near them; at first they
refused food, but after a while their hunger got the best of their
obstinacy and they ate the berries and leaves that were gathered for
them from their native forests. But all sickened and died, and I believe
that no one has ever succeeded in taming one of these animals."

"Was nothing known about the gorilla until Mr. Du Chaillu hunted him?"
Fred asked, as Doctor Bronson paused.

"Something was known about him," was the reply, "but not a great deal;
he had been heard of for several centuries, but no white man had ever
seen a living or even a dead gorilla. Dr. Wilson, a missionary on the
west coast of Africa, discovered the skull of a gorilla in 1846, and a
year later he found the skull and part of the skeleton of another. These
relics were sent, one to Dr. Savage, of Boston, and the other--the
second discovery--to the Boston Society of Natural History.

"Wonderful stories were told about this animal by the negroes. It was
said that he lurked upon trees, by the roadside or overhanging the
paths, drew up unsuspecting passers-by with his paws, and then choked
them to death. He was said to carry a stick or staff when walking, and
to use it as a weapon of defence; troops of gorillas thus attacked
elephants and beat them to death; the gorilla built himself a house of
leaves and twigs among the trees and sat on the roof; and sometimes
whole armies of gorillas banded together for purposes of war. All these
stories proved to be fables; almost the only truthful account of the
gorilla's prowess was that he was a terrible fighter and more than a
match for a lion. Mr. Du Chaillu says that the lion does not inhabit the
same region with the gorilla, and there is little doubt that the latter
can whip the lion in ordinary combat.

[Illustration: GORILLA SKULL.]

"The strength of this creature is prodigious. A young one, two or three
years old, requires four strong men to hold it, and even then in its
struggles it is likely to bite one or more of them severely. It can dent
a musket-barrel with its teeth, and an adult gorilla will bend a musket
as though it were made of the softest wood. It can break off trees three
or four inches in diameter, and a single blow of one of its fists will
smash a man's skull like a sledge-hammer. It fights with arms and teeth,
and does terrible execution with both."

[Illustration: HUMAN SKULL.]

"Does the gorilla walk erect like man, or on all-fours like the other
members of the ape family?" Frank inquired.

"Ordinarily it walks on all-fours," the Doctor answered, "but under
certain circumstances it stands erect. When it advances to meet an
assailant, or when desiring to look around, it rises to an erect
position, and then assumes its greatest resemblance to man. If you look
at the human and the gorilla skeletons side by side, you will perceive a
great difference in their structure and readily understand how the
locomotion of the gorilla on his hind-feet alone would not be altogether
convenient. The fore-legs, or arms, of the gorilla are very much longer
than those of man, and also very much stronger. A man unarmed could
offer no practical resistance to a gorilla, and all who have hunted him
understand this fact."

"Do they hunt him with anything else than guns?"

[Illustration: SKELETONS OF MAN AND THE GORILLA.]

"No; or, at any rate, they only do so on very rare occasions. The rule
of the gorilla-hunter is to wait until the animal is quite near, say
within twenty feet, before firing. Unless the first shot is fatal or can
be immediately followed by another from a repeating rifle or a gun in
the hands of others standing near, the man who fired the first shot is
almost certain to be killed. The gorilla rushes upon him, and there is
no chance for defence or flight. A single blow from the animal's fist
generally terminates the struggle. One of Du Chaillu's companions was
killed in this way, and the great hunter himself had a narrow escape. He
said it was very trying to his nerves to stand and wait five minutes or
more while the gorilla was advancing slowly, halting occasionally to
beat its breast and utter its cries, until he was in the very short
range desired."

"What do you think of the relation of the gorilla to man?" Fred asked,
with a smile developed on his face.

[Illustration: A YOUNG GORILLA--DU CHAILLU'S CAPTIVE.]

"That is a question I hesitate to discuss, as I am not versed in the
arguments that have been advanced by the scientists. Perhaps we'll talk
that over some other time, when we have more light on the subject. Du
Chaillu says that the gorilla skeleton, the skull excepted, resembles
the bony frame of man more than does that of any other anthropoid ape.
The form and proportion of the pelvis, the number of ribs, the length of
the arm, the width of the hand, and the structure and arches of the
feet--all these characteristics and some of its habits, appeared to the
hunter and explorer to place the gorilla nearer to man than any other
anthropoid ape is placed."

Doctor Bronson paused and looked at his watch; and his action was taken
as a signal for suspending the talk about the wild animals of Africa.
Frank and Fred thanked their mentor for the information he had given
them, and especially about the gorilla; their curiosity had been roused
by the repeated mention of the Soko in Mr. Stanley's story of his
journey "through the Dark Continent," and consequently the account of
this strange beast was heard with interest.

And as their conversation comes to an end we will return our thanks to
the trio of travellers, Doctor Bronson, Frank, and Fred, and express the
hope that we shall meet them again.

THE END.




INTERESTING BOOKS FOR BOYS.

       *       *       *       *       *

BOUND VOLUMES OF HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE for 1883, 1884, and 1885.
Handsomely Bound in Illuminated Cloth, $3.00 per vol. _Bound Volumes
for_ 1880, 1881, 1882, _and_ 1886, _are out of stock_.

THE BOY TRAVELLERS ON THE CONGO. Adventures of Two Youths in a Journey
with Henry M. Stanley "Through the Dark Continent." By THOMAS W. KNOX.
Copiously Illustrated. 8vo, Cloth. $3.00.

THE BOY TRAVELLERS IN THE RUSSIAN EMPIRE. Adventures of Two Youths in a
Journey in European and Asiatic Russia. With Accounts of a Tour across
Siberia, Voyages on the Amoor, Volga, and other Rivers, a Visit to
Central Asia, Travels among the Exiles, and a Historical Sketch of the
Empire from its Foundation to the Present Time. By THOMAS W. KNOX.
Copiously Illustrated. 8vo, Cloth, $3.00.

THE BOY TRAVELLERS IN SOUTH AMERICA. Adventures of Two Youths in a
Journey through Ecuador, Peru, Bolivia, Brazil, Paraguay, Argentine
Republic, and Chili. With Descriptions of Patagonia and Tierra del
Fuego, and Voyages upon the Amazon and La Plata Rivers. By THOMAS W.
KNOX. Copiously Illustrated. 8vo, Cloth, $3.00.

THE BOY TRAVELLERS IN THE FAR EAST. By THOMAS W. KNOX. Five Parts.
Copiously Illustrated. 8vo, Cloth, $3.00 each.

     PART I. ADVENTURES OF TWO YOUTHS IN A JOURNEY TO JAPAN AND
     CHINA.--PART II. ADVENTURES OF TWO YOUTHS IN A JOURNEY TO SIAM AND
     JAVA. With Descriptions of Cochin-China, Cambodia, Sumatra, and the
     Malay Archipelago.--PART III. ADVENTURES OF TWO YOUTHS IN A JOURNEY
     TO CEYLON AND INDIA. With Descriptions of Borneo, the Philippine
     Islands, and Burmah.--PART IV. ADVENTURES OF TWO YOUTHS IN A
     JOURNEY TO EGYPT AND PALESTINE.--PART V. ADVENTURES OF TWO YOUTHS
     IN A JOURNEY THROUGH AFRICA.

THE VOYAGE OF THE "VIVIAN" to the North Pole and Beyond. Adventures of
Two Youths in the Open Polar Sea. By THOMAS W. KNOX. Profusely
Illustrated. 8vo, Cloth, $2.50.

HUNTING ADVENTURES ON LAND AND SEA. By THOMAS W. KNOX. Two Parts.
Copiously Illustrated. 8vo, Cloth, $2.50 each.

  PART I.  THE YOUNG NIMRODS IN NORTH AMERICA.
  PART II. THE YOUNG NIMRODS AROUND THE WORLD.

WHAT MR. DARWIN SAW IN HIS VOYAGE ROUND THE WORLD IN THE SHIP "BEAGLE."
Illustrated. 8vo, Cloth, $3.00.

FRIENDS WORTH KNOWING. Glimpses of American Natural History. By ERNEST
INGERSOLL. Illustrated. 16mo, Cloth, $1.00.

BY CHARLES CARLETON COFFIN. Four Volumes. Illustrated. 8vo, Cloth, $3.00
each.

     THE STORY OF LIBERTY.--OLD TIMES IN THE COLONIES.--THE BOYS OF '76
     (A History of the Battles of the Revolution).--BUILDING THE NATION.

CAMP LIFE IN THE WOODS; AND THE TRICKS OF TRAPPING AND TRAP MAKING. By
W. HAMILTON GIBSON, Author of "Pastoral Days." Illustrated by the
Author. 16mo, Cloth, $1.00.

HOW TO GET STRONG, AND HOW TO STAY SO. By WILLIAM BLAIKIE. With
Illustrations. 16mo, Cloth, $1.00.

"HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE" SERIES. Illustrated. 16mo, Cloth, $1.00 per vol.

     THE ADVENTURES OF JIMMY BROWN. Written by Himself, and Edited by
     W. L. ALDEN.--THE CRUISE OF THE CANOE CLUB. THE CRUISE OF THE
     "GHOST." THE MORAL PIRATES. By W. L. ALDEN.--TOBY TYLER; OR, TEN
     WEEKS WITH A CIRCUS. MR. STUBBS'S BROTHER: A Sequel to "Toby
     Tyler." TIM AND TIP; OR, THE ADVENTURES OF A BOY AND A DOG. LEFT
     BEHIND; OR, TEN DAYS A NEWSBOY. RAISING THE "PEARL." SILENT PETE.
     By JAMES OTIS.--THE STORY OF MUSIC AND MUSICIANS. JO'S OPPORTUNITY.
     ROLF HOUSE. MILDRED'S BARGAIN, AND OTHER STORIES. NAN. By LUCY C.
     LILLIE.--THE FOUR MACNICOLS. By WILLIAM BLACK.--THE LOST CITY; OR,
     THE BOY EXPLORERS IN CENTRAL ASIA. INTO UNKNOWN SEAS. By DAVID
     KER.--THE TALKING LEAVES. An Indian Story. TWO ARROWS: A Story of
     Red and White. By W. O. STODDARD.--WHO WAS PAUL GRAYSON? By JOHN
     HABBERTON, Author of "Helen's Babies."--PRINCE LAZYBONES, AND OTHER
     STORIES. By Mrs. W. J. HAYS.--THE ICE QUEEN. By ERNEST
     INGERSOLL.--WAKULLA: A STORY OF ADVENTURE IN FLORIDA. THE FLAMINGO
     FEATHER. By C. K. MUNROE.--STRANGE STORIES FROM HISTORY. By GEORGE
     CARY EGGLESTON.

THE STARTLING EXPLOITS OF DR. J. B. QUIÃˆS. From the French of PAUL
CÃ‰LIÃˆRE. By Mrs. CASHEL HOEY and Mr. JOHN LILLIE. Profusely Illustrated.
Crown 8vo, Extra Cloth, $1.75.

FROM THE FORECASTLE TO THE CABIN. By Captain S. SAMUELS. Illustrated.
12mo, Extra Cloth, $1.50.

MICROSCOPY FOR BEGINNERS; OR, COMMON OBJECTS FROM THE PONDS AND DITCHES.
By ALFRED C. STOKES, M.D. Illustrated. 12mo, Cloth, $1.50.

MARY AND MARTHA. The Mother and the Wife of George Washington. By BENSON
J. LOSSING, LL.D., Author of "Field book of the Revolution," "Field-book
of the War of 1812," "CyclopÃ¦dia of United States History," &c.
Illustrated by Fac-similes of Pen-and-ink Drawings by H. Rosa. 8vo,
Ornamental Cloth, $2.50.

THE HISTORY OF THE UNITED STATES NAVY, FOR BOYS. By BENSON J. LOSSING,
LL.D. Illustrated. 12mo, Half Leather, $1.75.

THE ADVENTURES OF A YOUNG NATURALIST. By LUCIEN BIART. With 117
Illustrations. 12mo, Cloth, $1.75.

AN INVOLUNTARY VOYAGE. By LUCIEN BIART. Illustrated. 12mo, Cloth, $1.25.

ROUND THE WORLD; including a Residence in Victoria, and a Journey by
Rail across North America. By a Boy. Edited by SAMUEL SMILES.
Illustrated. 12mo, Cloth, $1.50.

THE SELF-HELP SERIES. By SAMUEL SMILES. 12mo, Cloth, $1.00 per volume.

     SELF-HELP.--CHARACTER.--THRIFT.--DUTY.

POLITICS FOR YOUNG AMERICANS. By CHARLES NORDHOFF. 12mo, Half Leather,
75 cents.

THE CHILDREN OF OLD PARK'S TAVERN. A Story of the South Shore. By
FRANCES A. HUMPHREY. 16mo, Cloth, $1.00.

STORIES OF THE GORILLA COUNTRY. By PAUL B. DU CHAILLU. Illustrated.
12mo, Cloth, $1.50.

THE COUNTRY OF THE DWARFS. By PAUL B. DU CHAILLU. Illustrated. 12mo,
Cloth, $1.50.

WILD LIFE UNDER THE EQUATOR. By PAUL B. DU CHAILLU. Illustrated. 12mo,
Cloth, $1.50.

MY APINGI KINGDOM: with Life in the Great Sahara, and Sketches of the
Chase of the Ostrich, Hyena, &c. By PAUL B. DU CHAILLU. Illustrated.
12mo, Cloth, $1.50.

LOST IN THE JUNGLE. By PAUL B. DU CHAILLU. Illustrated. 12mo, Cloth,
$1.50.

THE BOYHOOD OF GREAT MEN. By JOHN G. EDGAR. Illustrated. 16mo, Cloth,
$1.00.

THE FOOTPRINTS OF FAMOUS MEN. By JOHN G. EDGAR. Illustrated. 16mo,
Cloth, $1.00.

HISTORY FOR BOYS; or, Annals of the Nations of Modern Europe. By JOHN G.
EDGAR. Illustrated. 16mo, Cloth, $1.00.

SEA-KINGS AND NAVAL HEROES. A Book for Boys. By JOHN G. EDGAR.
Illustrated. 16mo, Cloth, $1.00.

THE WARS OF THE ROSES. By JOHN G. EDGAR. Illustrated. 16mo, Cloth,
$1.00.

UPLAND AND MEADOW. A Poaetquissings Chronicle. By CHARLES C. ABBOTT,
M.D., pp. x., 398. 12mo, Ornamental Cloth, $1.50.

STORIES OF THE ISLAND WORLD. By CHARLES NORDHOFF. Illustrated. 12mo,
Cloth, $1.00.

THE THOUSAND AND ONE NIGHTS; or, The Arabian Nights' Entertainments.
Translated and Arranged for Family Reading, with Explanatory Notes, by
E. W. LANE. 600 Illustrations by Harvey. 2 vols., 12mo, Cloth, $3.50.

HENRY MAYHEW'S WORKS. 4 vols., 16mo, Cloth, $1.25 per vol.

     THE BOYHOOD OF MARTIN LUTHER.--THE STORY OF THE PEASANT-BOY
     PHILOSOPHER.--YOUNG BENJAMIN FRANKLIN.--THE WONDERS OF SCIENCE.

SCIENCE FOR THE YOUNG. By JACOB ABBOTT. Illustrated. 4 vols.:
_Heat.--Light.--Water and Land.--Force._ 12mo, Cloth, $1.50 each.

OUR CHILDREN'S SONGS. Illustrated. 8vo, Ornamental Cover, $1.00.

THE HISTORY OF SANDFORD AND MERTON. By THOMAS DAY. 18mo, Half Bound, 75
cents.

YOUTH'S HEALTH-BOOK. 32mo, Paper, 25 cents; Cloth, 40 cents.

STORIES OF THE OLD DOMINION. From the Settlement to the End of the
Revolution. By JOHN ESTEN COOKE. Illustrated. 12mo, Cloth, $1.50.

THE LIFE AND SURPRISING ADVENTURES OF ROBINSON CRUSOE, of York, Mariner;
with a Biographical Account of DEFOE. Illustrated by Adams. Complete
Edition. 12mo, Cloth, $1.00.

THE HISTORY OF A MOUTHFUL OF BREAD, and its Effect on the Organization
of Men and Animals. By JEAN MACÃ‰. Translated from the Eighth French
Edition by Mrs. ALFRED GATTY. 12mo, Cloth, $1.75.

THE SERVANTS OF THE STOMACH. By JEAN MACÃ‰. Reprinted from the London
Edition, Revised and Corrected. 12mo, Cloth, $1.75.

FRED MARKHAM IN RUSSIA; or, The Boy Travellers in the Land of the Czar.
By W. H. G. KINGSTON. Illustrated. Small 4to, Cloth, 75 cents.

SELF-MADE MEN. By CHARLES C. B. SEYMOUR. Many Portraits. 12mo, Cloth,
$1.75.

THE SWISS FAMILY ROBINSON; or, Adventures of a Father and Mother and
Four Sons on a Desert Island. Illustrated. 2 vols., 18mo, Cloth, $1.50.

THE SWISS FAMILY ROBINSON--Continued: being a Sequel to the Foregoing. 2
vols., 18mo, Cloth, $1.50.

DOGS AND THEIR DOINGS. By Rev. F. O. MORRIS, B.A. Illustrated. Square
8vo, Cloth, Gilt Sides, $1.75.

TALES FROM THE ODYSSEY FOR BOYS AND GIRLS. By C. M. B. 32mo, Paper, 25
cents; Cloth, 40 cents.

THE ADVENTURES OF REUBEN DAVIDGER; Seventeen Years and Four Months
Captive among the Dyaks of Borneo. By J. GREENWOOD. 8vo, Cloth,
Illustrated, $1.25; 4to, Paper, 15 cents.

WILD SPORTS OF THE WORLD. A Book of Natural History and Adventure. By J.
GREENWOOD. Illustrated. Crown 8vo, Cloth, $2.50.

CAST UP BY THE SEA; or, The Adventures of Ned Grey. By Sir SAMUEL W.
BAKER, M.A., F.R.S., F.R.G.S. 12mo, Cloth, Illustrated, $1.25; 4to,
Paper, 15 cents.

HOMES WITHOUT HANDS: Being a Description of the Habitations of Animals,
classed according to their Principle of Construction. By the Rev. J. G.
WOOD, M.A., F.L.S. With about 140 Illustrations engraved on Wood by G.
Pearson, from Original Designs made by F. W. Keyl and E. A. Smith, under
the Author's Superintendence. 8vo, Cloth, $4.50; Sheep, $5.00; Roan,
$5.00; Half Calf, $6.75.

THE ILLUSTRATED NATURAL HISTORY. By the Rev. J. G. WOOD, M.A., F.L.S.
With 450 Engravings. 12mo, Cloth, $1.05.

CHAPTERS ON PLANT LIFE. By Mrs. S. B. HERRICK. Illustrated. Square 16mo,
Cloth, 60 cents.

FLY-RODS AND FLY-TACKLE. Suggestions as to their Manufacture and Use. By
HENRY P. WELLS. Illustrated. Post 8vo, Illuminated Cloth, $2.50.

NEW GAMES FOR PARLOR AND LAWN. New Games for Parlor and Lawn, with a few
Old Friends in a New Dress. By GEORGE B. BARTLETT. 16mo, Cloth, $1.00.

INDIAN HISTORY FOR YOUNG FOLKS. By FRANCIS S. DRAKE. With Colored
Frontispiece, Numerous Illustrations, and a Map of the United States,
showing the Locations and Relative Sizes of the Indian Reservations.
Square 8vo, Ornamental Cloth, $3.00.

       *       *       *       *       *

PUBLISHED BY HARPER & BROTHERS, NEW YORK.

HARPER & BROTHERS _will send any of the above works by mail, postage
prepaid, to any part of the United States or Canada, on receipt of the
price._




[Illustration: MAP: RELIEF EXPEDITION TO EMIN PASHA]





End of Project Gutenberg's The Boy Travellers on the Congo, by Thomas W. Knox

